FEMALE ROBINSON CRUSOE(--)THE LADIES' FAIR(--)A ladies' fair is to be held at tlie Musical Hall, on Bush street, on Tuesday evening next, the proceeds of which are to be devoted to the erection of St. Mary's Church. A great variety of curiosities will be on exhibition, some of which, from their rarity and peculiarity, will be well worth the attention of the scientific and the curious. Some of the most singular objects will be disposed of by lot or raffle, or as may at the time be thought proper and advisable. One ofthe most singular things ou exhibition will be the dress of an old Indian woman, who for seventeen years lived

"Alone, alone, all,all alone,
Alone <i>in</i> the wide, wide sea(--)
And ne'er a soul took pity on 
<i>Her</i> soul in agony."

This woman, it appears, was accidentally left on the island ofSan Nicholas(-—)which is about sixty miles from Santa Barbara(--)many years ago, when the rest ofthe few who iived there were taken off to the main land. It was known that she had been left, and attempts were made to find her, without success. Traces of her existence there have been seen from time to time, but not until recently has she ever been seen by any one, when a Mr. Niedever, of Santa Barbara, who was coasting about San Nicholas in search of otters, suddenly came upon her. She manifested little surprise at Mr. Niedever's appearance, and willingly left her solitary abode. The dress of bird skins which she wore is a great curiosity. How she killed the birds is unknown, or how she contrived to form the needle with which she sewed the skins together. A bottle made of wicker work was also brought away, and it passes belief that human skill could, with no tools but a small piece of rusty hoop iron, make anything so perfect. What long and dreary desolation this woman endured, or whether her life was ever diversified by anything to break the monotony of her loneliness, is unknown. She understood not a word of any language spoken by the nearest Indians, and died before anything could be learned of the incidents of her dark existence.

On the 18th ult. the old woman died of a severe dysentery, brought on itis supposed by eating immoderately of fuit and water melons. The change in her habits and mode of liviug, may also probably have contributed to hasten her death. Before her death Mrs. George Niedever, the wife of the gentleman who brought her off from Santa Nicholas, taught her the Lord's Prayer, the Hail Mary and the Creed; and as she expressed a desire to bo [be] baptized, Father Sanchez, one of the pious Franciscan fathers attached to the Mission of Santa Barbara, administered to her the sacrameut of baptism and admitted her into the Church.