<hi rend="bold">THE TOWN IN BRIEF.</hi>

C.S. Morey, of Denver, is at the Arlington.

H.G. Hutchins of Boston, is at the San Marcos.

Ice cream at the Presbyterian church, Friday evening.

Rev. J. R. de Wolfe Cowie of Pasadena, is at the San Marcos.

Harleigh Johnston of the San Ysidro Rancho, is registered at the San Marcos.

Mr. and Mrs. M. Cassand and Theo. P. Bailey and wife of Chicago, are at the Arlington.

A. Rothschild, Wm. T. McLean and W. J. Barrett of San Francisco, are at the San Marcos.

Mr. and Mrs. S. S. White, Jr., and R. Stockton and maid of Philadelphia, are at the San Marcos.

D. C. Packard and wife, Miss Packard and Miss A. W. Smith of Denver, are at the San Marcos.

Major J. K. Duncan, route agent for Wells, Fargo &amp; Co., is in town, a guest at the Commercial Hotel.

Jos. Meyerstein, M. Seiler, S. Korfrer and J. F. Libbey of San Francisco, are at the Raffour House.

Mr [sic] and Mrs [sic] H.C. Judd, of Hartford, Ct. and S. Y. Judd, of San Francisco, are at the Arlington.

Mrs [sic] A. L. Stone, Miss Stone and Mrs [sic] R. B. Wallace and Son, of San Francisco, are at the Arlington.

Mr. and Mrs. F. A. Brown, Mrs. Charlier, Miss Nash, R. J. Roberts and Arda La Croix of New York, are at the San Marcos.

Mrs. Daniel Ahl, Ralph P. Ahl, James P. Pomeroy, Miss Pomeroy and Miss Frances Pomeroy of Boston, are at the Arlington.

Mr. and Mrs. Samuel W. Rogers and Mrs. Alonzo Land of Boston, are at the Commercial Hotel, Mr. Rogers is a heavy lumber dealer of Boston.

Wm [sic] Currer and wife, Robt [sic] M. Currer, Miss Mabel Currer and Geo M [sic] Barber and wife, H. C. Fall and John Dillon,of [sic] Chicago are at the San Marcos.

Steamer Los Angeles will go north from this city tomorrow afternoon. Charles Miller, D. Bottenstein, S. Soto and A. Rothschild have engaged passage from this city.

Mrs. William Young will continue the restaurant business at the old stand, corner of State and De la Guerra streets and will be glad to see her old patrons and friends.

An entertainment will be given in the Presbyterian Church Parlors Friday evening, March 11, for the benefit of the Y. P. S. C. E. Everybody invited. Admission 10 cts.

A good picture of Tu-toch-ah-nu-lah, late Chief of the Yosemite tribe, who died in 1885 aged 145 years, can be seen in the window of Rowley &amp; Dunshee, druggists on State street.

Mrs. Arza Porter arrived yesterday from Huasna Ranch. She comes in response to information that Mrs. M. Sparks, her mother, was seriously ill. We are glad to know that Mrs. Sparks is better today.

Steamer Santa Rosa is reported due at 3:15 this afternoon from San Francisco. She has thirty passengers and fifty-one tons of freight for this city. The steamer goes south this evening at 6:30.

The Ojai, usually quite accurate, repeats the note which appeared in the Press relative to the metamorphosis of the little animal which is eating the grain on the Hope Rancho. Dr. Yates published in those columns a full account of the little animal that was scientifically accurate. Bro. Masick didn't seem to "catch on."

At the Opera House last night, the Wilber company presented the highly sensational comedy drama Shadows of a Home. The dialogue of the play is extremely interesting and held the attention of the audience to the end of the last act. The comedy scenes are very catchy and pleased the large audience immensely. The costuming was appropriate and costly, and the piece gave the best of satisfaction.&#8212;Topeka Capital.

The Ojai says Joaquin Miller's novelette concerning the Woman of San Nicolas has started the coast papers to telling what they know (or don't know) of the matter. "The San Francisco Examiner and the Santa Barbara Press and INDEPENDENT have all come out lately with versions, but the article by Dr. Lorenzo G. Yates of Santa Barbara, published in the INDEPENDENT is, we believe, nearer the actual facts than the others. Since the publication of these articles the Ojai has become possessed of some facts about San Nicolas, which elucidate the manner in which the aboriginal inhabitants of this now waste island lived and died. San Nicolas will form the text for another article soon.

A gentleman of this city took a walk down on the beach yesterday afternoon. He went over and beyond Castle Rock. About two or three hundred yards ahead were a couple of men standing near the bluff and enjoying shooting at a target of stones placed near the tide. As the Barbare隳 walked along he suddenly felt his hat move and a buzz at his ear. A small bullet also dropped at his feet. The cause of this was probably, [sic] one of the shots had glanced from the target and had just expended its energy as it reached and touched the man's hat. There is too much shooting indulged in hereabouts. Some severe or fatal accident will be reported next. The beach, populated as it is every day by pleasure seekers, is no place for shooting matches.