<hi rend="bold">THE HEROINE OF SAN NICHOLAS.</hi>

<hi rend="bold">A Woman's Life For Eighteen Years on a Desert Island.</hi>

A Modern Fact More Marvelous Than the Time-Honored Fiction of Robin[s]on Crusoe.

BY J. H. RAWLINS.

Sometime prior to the year 1833 the Mission Fathers of Lower California, in their efforts to christianize and accustom to honest labor the Indian tribes on the coast, had placed them on various islands of the Santa Barbara group, to pusue [sic] the fishery of otter and seal. One of these, San Nicholas, scarcely eight miles long by four broad, was after some time abandoned, and the whole of its inhabitants were brought away in a vessel sent by the good fathers. While they were leaving, a gale sprung up, and it was at the same time discovered that a child had been left behind. The mother, a half-breed Indian woman of superior intelligence to her race, implored the captain to send a boat ashore for it. He refused, on the ground of peril to all the rest, if they did not put at once to sea. Frantic and excited at the loss of her child, the woman leaped into the sea and swam back to the island in search of it. The vessel sailed, but having been wrecked off San Francisco, no return was practicable, and for fifteen years no steps were taken to ascertain if the woman was living or not. Father Gonzales, having never forgotten her disappearance, offered at length a reward of $200 for the rescue of woman or child, and the result, after three years more, was the discovery of the woman on the island, still in good mental and bodily health, but with the power of articulate speech gone. The vouchers for this extraordinary narrative, and its details, were recently given at length in <emph>Scribner's Monthly</emph>. The relics of this female Crusoe are still to be found at Santa Barbara.

A tale of mother's love, so deep,
Long solitude, self-sacrifice&#8212;
It glorifies an islet steep
That in the far Pacific lies,
Where, 'midst despairs, and hopes, and fears,
A woman lived for eighteen years.

Alone her footstep trod it's [sic] strand,
Alone she watched the pathless sea.
Of sex marked by Creator's hand
For kindred, love, society; 
On the small isle, St. Nicholas:
What fiction could such fact surpass?

'Twas thus: It's [sic] dwellers, scarce a source&#8212;
Women and children, youth and age&#8212;
Were leaving its ungenial shore&#8212;
'Twas midst a sudden tempest's rage&#8212;
In schooner sent by wise command
Of Mission Fathers on mainland.

The wind blew hard, the waves were tossed
To fury, and, as died the day,
Beat on the rugged rock-walled coast,
And rolled into the open bay,
Then rose, more mournful than the gale,
A widow's cry, a woman's wail.

"My babe! Oh God! 'tis left behind!
'Twas in the arms, I heard and thought,
Of sailor, that I here might find
What most on earth I loved and sought.
Oh! let the boat to land return;
A mother's prayer you cannot spurn."

"Mark you those crested waves that break
On rocks ere long to be our grave,
If we no open water seek?
To-morrow we return to save,"
The master said, and gave command 
To leave at once the dangerous strand.

The frantic mother, midst the roar
Of storm-tossed wave and tempest wild,
Leaps midst their foam, swims, drifts to shore,
In desperate quest of her lost child.
Man gauges the star depths above;
What lore can sound a mother's love?

A woman not devoid of grace,
Widowed, yet young, reserved in mein. [sic]
Of medium height, of Indian race,
Had vanished, by no eye was seen,
For eighteen years; alas! her child,
Unfound, a prey to creatures wild.

Vanished from sight, but not from mind: 
Who could forget that thrilling cry?
Did she the babe she sought e'er find?
Lived she, or did she, lingering die?
Thus mused the captain, vowed to seek
Again the isle and rocky creek.

A schooner in those seas alone,
She daily plies her coasting trade,
Whose growing wants, each day more shown,
Cast private needs and cares in shade,
Till she is shipwrecked, the crew all saved,
The scene upon each heart engraved.

Dead or alive, one Father's mind
The question haunts year after year;
Woman or child perchance to find,
Someone to that lone isle shall steer.
Though now full fifteen years had sped, 
And seek the lost, all else thought dead.

What task, with gold to win, is hard?
What toil will not be gladly braved?
Ere long a bounteous reward,
For child or long-lost woman saved,
Secured another vessel small,
Whose master searched the island all.

Two hours, and he its limits paced 
In length, its breadth he trod in one;
Fox and wild dog his keen eye traced,
Then, hid behind a sandy dune,
He found a curious dwelling made,
Of ribs of whales, in circles laid.

Of human trace no more, but seal
And otter, countless on the strand;
Listeners at home new interest feel, 
Seal-fishers and a larger band
Remanned the bark, which cleft the waves
Of seventy miles, and reached those caves.

A second time from shore to shore
The isle is searched, midst summer's glow,
Gay butterflies the grass flit o'er,
The cactus blooms, the wild flowers blow.
In vain, no further trace they found,
Of human life its brief space round.

Six weeks they plied their fishery,
And once a sailor, 'midst a gale,
Upon a cliff, surveyed on high
A moving form; his cheek grew pale;
Along the ledge it swiftly ran,
Shouted or beckoned, ghost or man.

Then disappeared. Three years passed by, 
And just before the band returned,
Walking by night, their leader's eye,
'Neath moon full orbed, that almost burned,
So bright its blaze&#8212;still searching round,
Saw a small footpring on soft ground.

"The woman of the isle, my God!
And she lives still, these prints confess;"
He lifts his voice, "Yes, here she trod&#8212;
A female foot in slenderness."
He rends the air in Spanish tongue,
Searching ravines and rocks among.

Next morn still searched, found in a tree,
A basket of wove rushes made,
Filled with such useful housewifery
As thread and needles, bone; there laid
With robe of featherwork, fine sewn,
And ornaments of wood and stone.

Elsewhere, a larder of dried meat,
Secured from birds and beasts of prey; 
And wedged in clefts beneath the feet
Dried fish, securely stowed away.
But further sign of woman there
No eye could trace, in earth or air.

A few more weeks, and all prepare
To leave the isle, their leader sure
The long-lost woman still is there;
And once more, moved by golden lure,
He seeks again the hut of bone,
Where once had lived some creature lone: [sic]

Again saw footsteps, and a head
Creeping and hiding in the break: 
Some wild dogs round about it sped,
And heard a voice to them that spake,
At which they bounded to the hill,
Trained, clearly, by a human will

Thus was she found, with fear half wild,
Than most of Indian blood more fair,
With countenance refined and mild.
With long, thick, matted, soft brown hair; 
Shading her eyes, transfixed with dread,
At sight of man&#8212;old memories dead.

But soon true womanhood she showed;
Clad in a tunic, feather formed,
Her heart like coals new kindle glowed.
As to expected guests it warmed, 
And with her sex's social mood
From roasted roots she offered food.

Found to be lost, amidst her kind,
Lost, too, all she had known of speech,
For soon she drooped, though glad in mind,
By gentleness endeared to each;
And in her noon of life she died.
With loving hearts and homes beside.

But not before she oft revealed, 
By signs, how passed those lingering years,
Nor her wild grief, at first concealed. [sic]
For her lost babe, deveoured her tears,
Her terror, then her deep despair,
Then calmness, left to linger there.

She died, her very name unknown.
Her place of birth, her years, her creed. [sic]
Not without veneration shown
For some great Spirit, sought in need;
And, as she died, the good divine
Traced on her brow the Christian's sign.

Such is the story, every page
As gospel in its details true
To men well-known, advanced in age,
Its very relics, clear to view
Of female Crusoe, often told
In Californian land of gold.

<emph>From the Wrexham (Wales,) Advertiser, May 28, 1881.</emph>