Tiny Skeleton Recalls 1835 Island Saga

Bones Believed Those of Mystery Hermit's Child

BY TED SELL

Arthur R. Sanger has a skeleton in his closet.

Actually, of course, it isn't really in his closet but in a display case in a small compartment off Sanger's living room at 2910 S Budlong Ave.

And it isn't a skeleton that Sanger is ashamed of. Indeed, he's proud of it.

The skeleton, Sanger believes, is that of the dead child of the 19th century hermit of San Nicolas Island.

The hermit, a figure or mystery in Southern California history, was a woman left behind and alone when the last of the San Nicolas Indians were removed from the island in 1835.

As the Peor es Nada started to sail, an Indian woman leaped ashore to gather up (so history has it) her baby, overlooked when the surviving score of Indians were brought to the ship.

Marooned on Island

A storm drove away the boat and the woman was doomed to 18 lonely years on the wind-whipped island.

When she was taken off by another vessel in 1853, she told her rescuers that her baby had been killed by wild dogs years earlier.

Sanger's skeleton, he believes, is that of the child for whose life a mother became a solitary seal hunter on San Nicolas.

Found in a mound atop another mound of sand, Sanger's skeleton was buried with beads which, he has determined, must have been imported to the island at a fairly late date.

Of Reeent Origin

The fact that the skeleton itself had not been uncovered by the constant, gales sweeping the island, Sanger says, is evidence that the grave was of fairly recent origin. Most relics, the independent 68-year old archeologist said, are unearthed by the winds rearranging island sands.

The skeleton is that of a small child, buried according to Indian custom in a fetal position.

"The Indians believed," Sanger explained, "that a man sould leave the world in the position in which he entered it."

The skeleton is only one of literally thousands of Indian relics Sanger has stored, carefully numbered, at his home. A master log records the date and place and circumstances of discovery of myriads of Indian mortars and pestles, effigies, ornaments, beads and other discoveries.

Discoveries in Museum

Addional thousands of Sanger's discoveries are at the Museum of the American Indian in New York. Sanger, for 30 years a real estate broker some of the time, archeologist the rest, pursued some of his work for the Heye Foundation, operators of the museum.

An additional 85 of his finds are at the Los Angeles County Museum, he said.

Most of the relics were found, Sanger said, on the seven Channel Islands spread like a rocky crescent athwart the offshore waters.

Some relics also came from excavations Sanger made 17 miles north of Malibu in the Arroyo Sequit.

Chumash Tribe Relics

Much of the finds were those of the Chumash Tribe, a relatively advanced Indian nation living in the Santa Barbara district and, Sanger says, on the Channel Islands.

The beadwork and other artifacts show great patience and no little skill at working with crude implements.

They were collected during 30 years of exploring by Sanger, a bachelor. From 1900 to 1945 he maintained his own auxiliary schooner, the 72-foot Old Dreamer, for his archeological trips to the seven islands.

In 1945 he traded the schooner for a 16-foot trailer in which he and his sister, Mrs. Agnes Sanger Mulden, now explore the United States.

3 Times Around U.S.

"We've been completely around the country three times since then," he said.

But Sanger's first love is archeological research in to the customs and history of the coastal Indians&#8212;with emphasis on the history of the ill-fated Channel Islands natives destroyed, as it were, by the idyllic life they led on the islands where the things needed for life were brought easily.

Other archeologists and anthropologists have speculated that the ease of life on the storm-swept islands was indeed the factor which made the Indians easy prey to marauding Russians and Aleuts during sea-otter expeditions of the late 18th and early 19th centuries.

It was to save the last San Nicolas Islanders from the raiders that the Peor Es Nada visited the island in 1835&#8212;and left the single woman ashore.

Bitter Over Closing

Of governmental closing of the islands, Sanger has bitter words. He fears that closing many of the best archeological hunting grounds will mean the irrevocable loss of relics they contain.

"The wind uncovers them," he explained, "and they'll disintegrate. They should let the pot hunters collect them, to save them."

Sanger says, however, that mainland diggings, such as those at the Arroyo Sequit, should be excavated only under direction of trained archeologists.

"But the situationis different there," he adds. "There's no danger of them being lost unless careless diggers haul them away. On the islands, the things will be lost."

Five Navy-Controlled

Of the seven Islands, five are under partial or complete control of the Navy, Sanger said. They are Santa Cruz, San Nicolas, San Miguel, Santa Rosa and San Clemente. The last has been blasted by Navy guns as a bombardment range.

Among the items carefully saved by Sanger are several skulls, in two of which arrow heads are firmly imbedded as a result of what apparently was tribal warfare or murder.

Another skull, Sanger said, belongs to a skeleton which he found practically intact. In the spinal column of that skeleton,  he pointed out, is welded firmly a large spear point, apparently driven through the victim in what Sanger thinks might have been a ritual murder. The skull, with teeth not worn down by Indian eating habits, is different from those of Indians found nearby.

Good Luck Effigies

Also in Sanger's collection are whale effigies, used to bring good luck to Indian fishermen, he explained. All have been laboriously shaped from rock and are complete to the sculptured spray spout. One is worn by constant rubbing which Sanger says apparently took the place of prayer for good fishing.

Other effigies are of a grizzly bear and sea turtles.

Indian beads&#8212;for the most part made of handworked abalone shell flakes&#8212;and trade beads, imported by Russion and
Spanish explorers, also fill display cases in Sanger's cabinets.