'Woman of San Nicolas' Not Myth

New Proof Found At Old Mission

Incontrovertible evidence that lifts the story of Juana Maria, the woman of San Nicolas island, from the realms of legend to fact has been uncovered in the archives of the Old Mission, it was revealed during the past week by the mission fathers, as the result of research by two students at the mission, Fratera Blaise Cronin, O.F.M., and Kenneth Henriques, O.F.M.

The story, many times told in the years since the chain of incidents first took place, has had a place in California history, but has always been looked at askance by authoritative sources. Discovery of Juana Maria's burial record in the mission archives dispels the last shred of doubt of its veracity. 

LEFT BEHIND

Briefly, Juana Maria's story is this: In 1835 the schooner Peor Es Nada (There is Nothing Worse) was commissioned to remove the last of the Indians off lonely San Nicolas island. One of the Indian women noticed her child was missing and at the time of departure went in search of the infant. A storm forced the schooner to return to the mainland, and the woman was left marooned. The Peor Es Nada, the only vessel on the coast large enough to make the hazardous voyage to the island, subsequently was wrecked and the woman was left to her own devices on the rocky bit of land. 

In 1852 Captain George Nidever and Carl Dittmann (referred to as Charlie Brown by Nidever), at the island to gather seagull eggs, discovered traces of human life along the shore. Nidever's memoirs, edited and published by Dr. William H. Ellison of the State college faculty in 1937, related the incident and subsequent events, as do also the unpublished memoirs of Dittmann. 

CAREFUL SEARCH

By the following year Nidever and Dittmann had proved beyond a doubt there was a living human being on the island and two padres at the Old Mission, Fathers Gonzalez Rubio and Sanchez, asked them to make an attempt to find the woman. A searching party found the woman, who had seen no other human face for 18 years, and returned her to the mainland. 

Captain Nidever took the woman into his home and apparently she was very happy, although she spoke a language no one could understand and thus could communicate with none of the people about her. However, she sickened and died seven weeks after she had been brought to Santa Barbara. 

On her deathbed, Father Sanchez gave her conditional baptism and the Christian name of Juana Maria. She was buried in the Old Mission cemetery Oct. 19, 1853. 

START OF A LEGEND

Thus started the legend of the woman of San Nicolas. Despite the documentary evidence of Nidever and Dittmann, both widely known for their honesty, there still were doubting Thomases who said, in effect, "We're from Missouri. Show us the records." 

The late Father Zephrin Engelhardt, O.F.M., historian of the California missions, spent a great deal of time searching for the lost burial record without avail. Then, on the evening Jan. 10 of this year, the two student-brothers, doing research for an article for the student publication, "Priestly Studies," found the entry in the mission𠏋 Death Records of Presidio Santa Barbara (Entierros de los Razon o Indios).

The left-hand margin of the page carries the notation: 

1183

Juana Maria

India adlta.

Text of the entry is: 

"En 19 Octo de 1853 di sepulta ecca cemento as cadaver de Juana Maria India traida de la Isla de S. Nicolas,  a como no habia qu. le entendiese su idioma fue bautizada sub condicione pr el P. Sanchez; y pa qe consto lo firmo. Fr. Jo Ms de Js. Gonzz."

The translation is:

"On the 19 of October of 1853 I gave ecclesiastical burial in this cemetery to the mortal remains of Juana Maria an Indian brought from the Island of San Nicolas, and since there was no one who understood her language she was baptized conditionally by Father Sanchez; and that this may stand as true I sign it. Father Jose Maria de Jesus Gonzalez."

The entry is the 1,183rd in the record book and appears opposite page 114.

CAPTAIN GEORGE NIDEVER (above), early-day Santa Barbara trading vessel owner and otter trapper, who brought Juana Maria, the Woman of San Nicholas, from her lonely island and cared for her in his home until her death, told the story of her rescue in his journal, a facsimile of a portion of the last page of which is reproduced at the left. The picture and facsimile were used to illustrate Dr. William Ellison's book, published 1937, on the life of Captain Nidever.
