SANTA CATALINA ISLAND.

Money Raised for an Adition to the Church(--)A Good Goat Hunt.

AVALON (Santa Catalina Island,) Sept, 17.(--)[Regular Correspondence.] At a recent meeting held in the Ccongregational Church of Avalon a collection was taken for the purpose of building an addition to the church. The room will be thrown open in the summer as an extension to the audience room, and in the winter will be used as a private reading-room for the young men residing on the island. Over $600 was raised; the Banning Company contributing $$100 Justice Whitney, $75; while J. C. Jordan, a stranger to the island, gave a $100 bill. Others made donations according to their circumstances. Work will be commenced on the addition at once, and the room will be completed before the winter season opens.

MANY WILD GOATS [KILLED.]

During the past week many hunting parties have visited the mountains near Eagle's Nest. Thursday Dr. C. W. Bryson and J. Tod Cook of Los Angeles went by stage to Eagle's Nest and spent the entire day hunting for wild goats. When they returned to Avalon late that evening, they brought with them seven fine heads as an evidence of their good luck. One or the animals was shot with a r[ifl]e at a distance of seven hundred yards by Dr. Bryson. The best heads wlll be mounted as souvenirs. Another party, H. M. Coriette and Norwood Howard, guests of the Metropole, spent yesterday at Eagle's Nest hunting. Four goats were kllled by members of the [party.]

TO EXPLAIN SAN NICOLAS.

Perhaps the most Interesting feature in the history of the Southern California Islands is the story of the "Lost Woman of San Nicholas Island," who was deserted and recovered years ago. Her cave and place of residence has never been found. During the coming week an attempt is to be made to find it, but the principal object of the expedition is to survey the big Indian mound on the island. It represents the accumulations of cenuries. Commodore Burnham of the yacht San Diego isto make the trip, and he will have as his guests C. F. [H]older and Sidney Smith of Pasadena and E. L. Doran of Los Angeles. The yacht will leave Avalon Monday and wlll be gone a week or so.

CATALINA [BR]REVITIES.

Misses Gertrude McCrea, Mae McCrea, Groff, Dorothy Groff, Alice Groff, Edith Furrey; Messrs. Harry Polley and Ralph Burnham were entertained yesterday afternoon with a candy pull at the home of Herbert Gregg. Musio added to the pleasure of the afternoon.

Mrs. J. B. Holder and her sister, Mrs.John B. Eaton, who have been spending a month at the Miramar, returned to Pasadena today.

Mrs. Eva Gregg oC Hotel Pasadena, is spending a few days at Eagle'sNest.

Webster Wotkyns, postmaster at Pasadena, arrived today to join his family at the Miramar for a brief stay. He was accompanied by Marshal Wotkyns.

Mr. and Mrs. R. L. Craig of Los Angeles returned home today after a week's stay at the Metropole.

L. C. Torrance of Pasadena is spending a few days at the Metropole.

One of the most remarkable catches of the season was that made yesterday by Mr. and Mrs. Frank Decker of Pasadena. They spent the forenoonon the water, and returned with forty- seven rock bass and three immense yellowtail, the latter averaging in weight sixty-two pounds.

Mr. and Mrs. Charles H. Stratton have returned to Pasadena, having spent the summer here.

Hancock Banning has returned from a two-weeks' trip to San Francisco.

J. H. Schumacher, who has been the guest of Mr. and Mrs. J. B. Banningfor a week, returned to Los Angeles yesterday.

Col. Dunham arrived yesterday to spend a few days hunting and fishingon the island.

E. J. Pyle and Henry Newby of Pasadena arrived today to spend a week. They are guests of Mr. and Mrs. Frank V. Rider at Escondido cottage.

Mrs. Seth Arnold and Miss Evans, after a pleasant stay at the Metropole, have returned to Pasadena.

Miss Craig of Pasadena arrived yesterdy and is visiting at the home of Mr. and Mrs. Hancock Banning.

Mr. and Mrs. Parry Gavin, who have been among the Pasadena summer residents here, left yesterday for their home.

Mr. and Mrs. Warnke, Mrs. Irving S. Moberly, Mrs. S. F. Ellis and his son, Los Angeles; M. P. Patten, Miss Margaret Patten, Denver; Miss L. Holbert, Fort Worth. Tex., are recent arrivals at Eddy Terrace.

Ralph Glidden, who has been spending a week with his mother, returned to his home in Pasadena yesterday.

Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Carter, after a [p]leasant stay at the Metropole, left toda[y] for Los Angeles.

Those registering at the Glenmore yesterday were Ray B. Sumner, Edgar B. McKnight, Millard Arnott, Miss May Williams, Miss Bertha Morris, Miss Daisy Dalton, Los Angeles.

Hotel Pasadena closed yesterday for the summer season.

Mr. and Mrs. N. B. Blackstone, Madeline King, Los Angeles; L. C. Torrance, Edwin Stearns, Pasadena; Mr. and Mrs. M. D. Seavers, Salton, autographed at the Metropole yesterday.