A GHASTLY SPOT.

SAN NICOLAS ISLAND COVERED WITH HUMAN BONES.

Thousands of Skeletons Strewn on the Beach for a Distance of Five Miles. An Old Indian Graveyard.

The party who recently went to San Nicolas Island on a prospecting tour with a view to taking up government land, returned after a two days' visit on the island. They concluded not to exhaust their rights on land so valueless, says the Ventura Free Press.

From Frank Fazzio, who took them over, some interesting details of the trip are learned. The island is about four miles wide by twelve miles long, and is located some seventy miles off this coast, almost due south of here. The soil has all been blown off and the rocks are almost entirely bare and destitute of soil, giving the whole island a very barren appearance. On the western side sand is about the only thing seen and this had been blown from the beach clear to the top of the island, 700 or 800 feet high. On the other side of the islands, the east side, they found human bones for a distance of five miles along the beach. They were very thick and looked as if it had been a graveyard. They also discovered the remains of human bodies on the ridge which runs lengthwise through the island. In some places two skeletons were seen close together as if they had been buried together in the same grave. The wind had blown off what covering of soil had been thrown over them, and it looked quite ghastly. Bones wore [were] thickly strewn along this ridge for upwards of three miles. From appearances upwards of 3000 or 4000 Indians must have been buried there.

A shanty, which had been built on the west side, was found buried clear to the rood in sand. There are now about 2000 sheep on the island and from a sort of rough grass they seem to keep fat. The party went into a cave which afforded an Indian woman, the sole occupant of the island, a home for seven years. It seems that when her party was leaving the island, that she jumped overboard and swam ashore in the night. Years went by before she was taken off. The party enjoyed the trip immensely,  but soy [say] the island is not worth much.