A FEMALE ROBINSON CRUSOE.

Truth is very much stranger than fiction, and a female Crusoe, belonging to a class in society far different to that adorned by an English young lady of fashion, has recently been really discovered on the island of San Nicolas, off the southern coast of California, where she appears to have been accidentally abandoned, and to have spent the last eighteen years of her life. The involuntary recluse&#8212;we are sorry to have to speak of her in the past tense, but she is no more&#8212;was, according to a San Francisco newspaper, an Indian woman, and her existence was accidentally discovered by a man who had landed on the island to hunt for otters, and who found human footprints deeeply imbedded in the soil. But he soon lost the track, and during three years' periodical excursions to the island he was unable to light upon any further signs indicating the whereabouts of the "human." At length one of the party who accompanied him came suddenly on the object of their search, who was found in a kind of kraal or circular enclosure built of brushwood, about five feet high and six feet in diameter, with a small lateral opening. The Indian Miss Crusoe was attired in a garment made from the skins of the "shag," a species of ugly and unwieldy duck that can neither walk nor fly. It was a most clumsy costume, and reached nearly to her ancles [ankles] when she stood erect. When "interviewed" by the otter hunters she was sitting cross-leged, engaged in the useful but slightly malodorous occupation of skinning seal blubber with a rude knife fashioned from a piece of iron hoop driven into a piece of wood. She had no head-gear beyond a great shock of matted hair, which, probably owing to its constant exposure to the sun and the weather, had assumed a yellowish-brown hue, and which was short, as though the ends had rotted away. Now, Indians are almost always black-haired, and the comal phenomena of Miss Crusoe suggests a cheap and efficacious recipe for changing a brunette into a blonde, and shortening the hair without cutting it. Only the patient will have to go about bareheaded until the beneficent sun turns the dark locks, [sic] auburn and singes the ends. There were some half-wild dogs on the island, and a few of these animals kept near the kraal of the female Crusoe, and seemed to regard her as their mistress. As for her diet, she appears to have lived chiefly on the cabbage-like plant known to the Californians as "palo santo," also on a root called "corcomite." This will be pleasant news for the vegetarians; but the gratification of the Food Reform Society will be lessened when it is added that Miss Crusoe was much addicted to the consumption of seal blubber. She was also found to be in possession of a rude apparatus for catching shell fish, and her stock of string fishing lines, made from the sinews of seals, seemed to point to her having occasionally pursued deep sea fishing. Her countenance is described as pleasing, her features as regular, her complexion fairer, and her form more symmetrical than those of the Indian woman in the mainland. Perhaps she was not an Indian after all; but a Saratoga belle who had repented of her watering-place levities, and taken refuge in this solitude, where she had remained until all faculty of articulate speech had departed from her. It must be remembered that, unlike the original Robinson, she had no parrot, and consequently no facilities for conversational practice. Civilization is but skin deep; and it is astonishing in how brief a time Man, left to himself, will begin to run about on all fours and bark. The female Crusoe of San Nicolas did not bark, it is true; but she did not seem to understand any of the Indian dialects spoken in California, and did not volunteer any gibberish. She was a kind of Californian Fenella, for although substantially mute, she enjoyed a wonderful faculty for conversing by signs. She retained all her teeth, but they were worn low, probably owing to her chewing tough articles of food. As regards the delicate question of her age, her years, like those of Don Quixote, to all appearance "bordered on the fifties;" but she bowed to all who approached her, and greeted them with a smile. She must have been a Saratoga belle who had lost her speech, but who had retained the sweetness and grace of her manners.

Poor Miss Robinson Crusoe! The Californian otter hunters had much better have left her in her brushwood "ranch," on the Island of San Nicolas, contentedly cross-legged, wearing her ample robe of shag-duck, and supporting existnece on a simple diet of cabbage plant, corcomite, and seal blubber. She freely accompanied her discovers [discoverers] to their vessel, and at once won their esteem by the modesty and decorum of her demeanour. She exhibited singluar dexterity in making vessels for holding water out of grass and asphaltum, in both of which San Nicolas is very prolific; and she also seemed to recognize various appliances of civilization. A teakettle probably, or possibly a fryingpan. A great future awaited her. Arrived at San Francisco, she would have been feted and caressed, and ere long an agent of the ubiquitous Phineas T. Barnum would have arrived on the scene; and the female Crusoe might have been wafted to that Great Temple of Showmanship, the American Museum at New York, there to hold levees in the Halls made famous by the memories of the Mermaid, the Angle [Angel] Fish from Mexico, the Nova Scotian Giantess, the Albino Family, Washington's Nurse, and the Woolly Horse. Who knows but that in process of time, the female Crusoe from the Pacific might not have made her appearance in London, and delighted crowded audiences by skinning seal blubber, making water jars from grass and asphalt, and expressing by a series of animated signs, her opinions on the Eastern Question? We have been favored with the presence of the Hottentot Venus; the Bearded Lady, Miss Julia Pastrana; the stout Lady, Mrs. Armitage; the Two-headed Nightingale, the Aztec children, General Tom Thumb, Minnie Warren and Commodore Nut; but indeed a female Crusoe would have been indeed, a rairty [rarity]. She would have been as popular amongst us as Peter the Wild Boy was in the reign of George I., and as poor Kasper Hauser might have been had he escaped assassination. But this was not to be. Seven weeks after her arrival on the Californian mainland the poor female Cruso [Crusoe] sickened and died, partly it is stated, from the effects of a fall, and partly through an indisposition brought on by eating fruit and vegetables. She [must] have pined for her simple menu of "palo santa" and "corcomite," varied by seal blubber; and the circumstances of the fruits and vegetables of California having conduced to her dissolution, must additionally lessen the complacency of the Food Reform Society. A cource [course] of lentils might have saved her, but there were none seemingly at hand. She had been jjudiciously [judiciously] baptized by Padre Gonzelas, the superior of the mission of Santa Barbara; and that esteemed ecclesiastic has forwarded the female Crusoe's dress of shag-skins and her baskets and implements to the Museum of the Propaganda at Rome. It is a pity that she did not recover her speech, if only for a few minutes, before she passed away. She might have told the world whether she was really an Indian squaw, or a Saratoga belle disgusted with and retired from Vanity Fair.&#8212;<emph>London Telegraph</emph>.