<hi rend="bold">CATALINA CHATTER</hi>

<hi rend="bold">The Summer Season's Premature End. Duyckinck's Thousand Fish</hi

AVALON, Catalina Island, Sept 19.&#8212;Slowly and before its time the island is being depopulated. Yesterday a crows came over on the steamer at 1 oclock, but returned at 3 oclock. September is the most delightful month here, but habit and school terms are unreasoning tyrants.

Capt. "Sandy" McDonald is telling the boys about a wonderful dog that he rescued last week, who had managed to follow his mistress from Long Beach to the isthmus after she had left him on the mainland, disconsolate and alone.

Herbert Gregg entertained Misses Gertrude and Mae McCrea, Frances, Dorothy and Alice Groff and Edith Furrey, Messrs. Burnham and Harry Polley at a candy pull Saturday afternoon.

Mr. Duyckinck, who holds the record for the number of fish caught this season on rod and reel, is now bending all his efforts to catch the thirty-three fish necessary to make his total 1000 fish. Saturday he was out with Mexican Joe and caught fifteen yellowtail. The fish were found at the isthmus and in great numbers, but the limited time that he had to spend there did not allow him to get any more fish.

The church on the hill is to be enlarged during the winter. The additional room will be fitted out and used as a meeting and club room for those who stay here all winter. Magazines will be on the tables. Over $550 has been raised for the purpose.

Dr. C. W. Bryson and J. Todd Cook secured seven goat heads the other day. N Howard, Mr. and MRs. L. C. Craif and H M. Corlett also secured four fine heads.

The yacht San Diego returned from San Pedro yesterday. This afternoon the San Diego will leave on an exploration trip to San Nicolas. A search will be made for the Cave of the Lost Woman, who was marooned on the island years ago. The party will consist of E. L. Doran, Sid Smith and C. F. Holder.

The Hotel Pasadena has closed for the season.

Miss Craig of Pasadena is the guest of Mr. and Mrs. J. B. Banning.

Mr. and Mrs. Parry Gavin have returned to their home in Pasadena after spending the summer here.