<hi rend="bold">EXPLORATION</hi>

Of the Channel Islands,

Which Constitute California's Only Archipelago,

To Be Undertaken By Stanford University Students.

A Rich Field For Anthropological and Arch熪logical Research&#8212;Uncanny Traditions.

SPECIAL CORRESPONDENCE OF THE ENQUIRER.

POMONA, CAL., March 29, 1895.

An expedition of scientific students has been made up in Los Angeles and Pasadena, to thoroughly explore the Channel Islands off the coast of that part of California known as Santa Barbara and San Buenaventura Counties, during the next six months. The party is to be sustained by Leland Stanford, Jr., University largely, and to a less extent by several denominational colleges in Southern California. Anthropological and archaeological students who have spent several weeks each on these islands say they are one of the very richest fields for work in that department of knowledge on the Pacific Coast. The Channel Islands constitute California's only archipelago, with the possible exception of the rocky and scanty Farallone Islands. The former have been objects of romantic legends, curiosity and mystery for a generation or more. Notwithstanding all the islands are with 82 miles of the California shore they are solitary and unfrequented, and years roll by with visits to them of less than 50 people annually. Each island has its own particular, strange, uncanny tradtions, and each has countless traces of an occupation by thousands adn thousands of Indians. When Juan Rodriquez Cabrillo, the Portuguese navigator, sailed up the coast of California, in 1542, he stopped for a day or two at each of the Channel Islands, and his records bear testimony that on the islands of Santa Barbara, Catalina, San Clemente and San Nicolas there were "a vigorous and lusty race of natives, who thronged the shores of the little bays and headlands," and gazed in mute wonder at the white-sailed ship of the navigators. Today the islands stand as they did over 350 years ago, but the natives are only a memory, represented by immense quantities of stone implements, barrels of fine wampum and literal cartloads of human bones. San Nicolas Island, which lies 8 miles immediately opposite the little city of San Buenaventure (recently called by the more modern and easy name of Ventura), is the most interesting of all the Channel Islands from many points of view. As far back as the memory of any person in Southern California runs

HUNDREDS OF WHITE SKELETONS

Have dotted the valleys and hillsides. Strange utensils of serpentine, sandstone and steatite are found there among the human bones, and the island and its inhabitants have a history so curious that it is difficult of cpmprehension.

In 1835 the Franciscan padres in the Santa Barbara Mission, leaning that there were but 16 of the strange and almost extinct Indian race then living there, determined to rescue them from the island. They went over in a sloop and succeedd, at they thought, in getting all on board. At the last moment an Indian woman returned for her child, and one of the frequent storms of the channel islands springing up, the sloop was driven away without her. The sloop went on the rocks of Point Conception, and all on board were lost.

Sixteen years later Captain George Nidever and two men went from the coast on a sloop to hunt sea otter off San Nicolas. On landing they were, like Crusoe, astonished to discover human footprints in the sand. They saw no one, however, and a storm compelled them to put to sea.

It was two years thereafter that [t]he adventurous Captain, revolving in his mind the sight of the footprints in the uncanny island, determined to go and discover and bring over the lonely woman of whom he had vaguely heard. Men accompanied him, and at length they saw on the surf-beaten shre a woman with long tawny hair dressed in a queer garb of colored bird skins, and scraping, with a bone knife, the blubber from a seal.

They surrounded and approached her stealthily, and, although suddenly confronted, she did not apepar [appear] in the least afraid, but smiled, and then, falling on her knees, prayed to the sun. The wild woman offered no objection when by signs she was made to understand that she was to go with them in the boat.

They reached Santa Barbara across the rough sea, and the first thing the Indian woman saw was Dr. S. L. Shaw, now 8- years old, and yet living there, riding a horse. She had never seen nor heard of any object like it, and thought the man and horse were one, and she knelt on the shore and offered her devotions to it. Two weeks afterward the last inhabitant of rock-ribbed, tempest-rossed San Nicolas died from eating food to which she was unacustomed, furnished by her rescuers, and the curtain fell on er race forever. In speaking of that death, at a meeting of the Southern California Medical Society the other day, Dr. Walter Lindley said that if the woman could have been spared a few years of life a story of one of 

THE STRANGEST RACES

That ever lived in the Southwest and that had had no contamination with the whites, might have been learned. The woman, known as tthe [sic] "Lone woman of San Nicolas," has been the subject of a score of romances and poems and food for a lot of philosophy on the Pacific Coast for years.

San Nicolas is 10 miles long and four miles wide at the widest point. Its typography shows a nearly level plateau with an elevation of 800 to 1,000 feet. Two thirds of the surface is covered with drifting sand, and the remainder grows a species of nutritious grass and moss, on which a thousand sheep find pasture. Several springs have been discovered, but their water is slightly brackish. Of late years the island is rarely vistited, excepted by sheep shearers and shell gatherers, who make annual trips in schooners, fishing smacks or Chinese junks.

The only safe landing ground at San Nicolas is at Coral Harbor, a pretty cove formed by two sandstone arms thrust out from the main barrier of the shore. The entrance is but six or seven yards across, and the water within is placid as a lake and sufficiently deep to float a vessel of 20 tons burden. On the bleak, silvery strip of beach immense which pelicans are to be seen at almost any season in the year promenading with a stately dignity. On the approach of the dingy they spread their heavy, pointed wings and vanish over the rocks. Further up the slope of the beach there is a dilapidated shearing shed and a weather-worn shanty belonging to Chinese shell gatherers, who haunt these lonely cliffs during late summer and fall.

NOTHING MORE DESOLATE

Than the general appearance of the island can be imagined. As far as the eye can trace there are barren levels with innumerable circular depressions, showing where primitive dwellings once stood. Not a vestige remains of the materials used in the construction of these rancherias. Hundreds of shell mounds are scattered about, and are found to consist of astonishing numbers of mollusks, the bones of every species of fish found in the channel, skeletons of seals, sea elephants, whales, sea otter, the island fox and various aquatic birds. Without question these animals were used for food by the tribes that once thronged these boundaries. There are also numerous canine skeletons, several of which indicate a species of bull terrier. Judging form the immense quantities of dead land mollusks everywhere, there must have [been] a time when the island supported luxuriant vegetation. Of all this verdure nothing is seen to-day but a few stunted thorn bushes, and now and then a cactus forlornly reaching its grotesque arms out of the interminable sweeps of sand.

An examination of some of the mounds discloses all sorts of curious utensils, stone cooking pots, water ollas, mortars, pestles, drills, bone needles and fish hooks, shell beads, charm stones, pipes, cups and a few arrow heads, spear points and swords made of bone. The absence of many weapons proved the peaceful attribute of the islanders. Small imitations of boats and fish carved from crystallized talc and serpentine also show a rudimentary knowledge of the art of sculpture. In many places conical piles of small black pebbles contrats oddly with the white sand. In some instances these pebbles were closely packed in abalone shells. No trace is seen of the "brush pens," in which the lone woman of San Nicolas for years found her only shelter from the cutting wind and sand. Nature, ever unmindful of the individual, long since merged the superhuman efforts of this courageous life into the universal fate of an entire race. Indeed, every foot of this strange island is eloquent of the extinction of an

ALMOST UNHEARD-OF PEOPLE.

A trip along the west coast of San Nicolas Island over a vast extent of shell mounds sets on to wondering how it was possible for a limited population to consume such prodigious numbers of mollusks. In fact, the infinite variety of mollusca on San Nicolas is said by biologists not to be exceeded by any other known region of equal area. The shore line is of coarse sandstone, burrowed by the poinding surf into fantastic alcoves, bridges, columns and caves. Sometimes these savage cuts form rude effigies bearing surpriging likeness to living creatures. One of the most conspicious is the exact counterpart of the neck, breast, and body of a bird with an alert, hooded head. This piece of nature's sculpturing must be 40 feet long, and beheld from a distance looks quite as perfect as if fashioned by man. There are hundred of photographs of the freak of nature sold all over California.

Going westward from this gnawed, surf-lashed wall the ground makes a gentle descent to a wide mesa, terminating in a steep escarpment. The atmosphere from this elevation is so deliciously clear that the eye can readily distinguish the peak tops being 40 miles away. 