<emph>San Nicolas Island</emph>. So named on the chart of Viscaino. It is the one most distant from the mainland and one of the least fertile, poorest of the islands. It is 890 feet high and can be seen 34 miles away. The island is about 8 to 20 miles long.

This island is interesting, because on it lived the last remnant of the Indians belonging to the island tribes, indeed the only Indian of whom we have a detailed account. The island was like the others once thickly populated, but little by little the number of inhabitants became less. The reason is not fully known. But it is by some believed that the natives were partly exterminated by Indians from Alaska who had been brought down to these islands to hunt seaotter. Any how it is known that already in 1811 a ship from Boston had landed some 30 Indians from Kodiak on San Nicolas and it is said that they killed all the native men, and appropriated the women. However this may be, certain it is that in 1835 the natives on the island had dwindled down to 18, and it was decided by the missionaries on the mainland to remove these Indians to the missions of the mainland. Accordingly a vessel was sent to the island of San Nicolas and the Indians gathered in. This was in 1836. But when the Indians were all embarked, one of the women missed her babe. It had been left behind in some way. The mother started to hunt for it, but remaining away very long, and on account of a sudden and very heavy wind, the small vessel had to leave and lie before the wind out to sea. In course of time the Indians were landed at Santa Barbara and probably merged in other indian tribes. The vessel which was again to visit the island in order to bring back the remaining woman, was unfortunately shipwrecked on the coast, and as there was no other vessel of sufficient size to brave the rough waters around the island, it came to pass that for 18 long years the indian woman was left to her fate on the island. It was only in 1853 that a hunter with the name of Nidever from Santa Barbara visited the island and brought the woman away. He had seen some things of her already two years previously, but was then unable to find her. During this visit Nidever had seen several small windbreaks made of branches and canes. They were in the form of a half circle and bound together with grass ropes. He had also found regular, small, pyramidal houses or Indian huts made of branches etc., but the grass growing in them, and their dilapidated condition generally indicated that they bad not been used for years. When he found the woman at last she was living in such a windbreak. We may now follow Nidevers [Nidever's] tale: "She was sitting in an enclosure, so that her head and shoulders were barely visible above it. As the white man approached, two or three wild dogs began to howl, but she gave a yell at the dogs who then disappeared. She was sitting crosslegged on some grass that coverad the ground within the inclosure and which seemed to serve as bed. Her only dress consisted of a kind of gown, leaving her neck and shoulders bare, but it was long enough when she stood up to reach to her ankles. It was made of bird (shag) skin cut in squares and sewed together, the feathers pointing downwards. Her head had no covering save a thick mass of matted hair of a yellowish brown color, and which looked as if it bad rotted off. (See the account of Cabrillo and Viscaino of the fair color of the Indians). She was engaged in stripping a piece of blubber from a sealskin. Within the enclosure was a smouldering fire and a heap of ashes. She was constantly talking to herself. When first seeing Mr Brown the companion of Mr Nidever she smiled and received him most graciously and with much dignity and selfpossession [self possession]. And when the other men came up, she greeted them in the same manner.

The Indians which Mr. Brown had brought along did not understand a single word of what she said, although they knew several different dialects. From a bag she took out several roots (carcomites(?), also other roots, and roasting them on the fire she offered them to the men to eat. They found them very palatable. The visitors soon made her to understand that they wanted her to leave the island with them, and gathering up her belongings she was soon ready to start. She packed most of the things in a large basket made of rushes, while other of her things were bundled up by her visitors. She had so many things that every one of the visitors carried some of her belongings when leaving. Among her things was an extra dress made of fine birdskins and finely ornamented. She also insisted upon carrying off all the old dried blubber, and a seal's head which was so decayed that the brain was oozing out. She evidently desired to bring every thing that would sustain life. When all was ready she took from the fire a burning stick in her band and walked out. She led the party by a fine spring from which she drank, and then led them to an other spring in which she washed her face and hands. The island was inhabited by foxes and by wild dogs, similar to those which Nidever had seen among the Indians of the northern part of California. The indian woman took kindly to the food of her visitors, and evidently preferred it to the one she had been accustomed to. She was exuberant when one of the men made her a dress of calico, and observing how the man was sewing she insisted to try her hand at this too. She would push the needle in the cloth with her right hand and pull it out with her left one. At first she did not know how to thread the needle, but she learned quickly. In the hunters camp she made herself useful, in carrying wood and water. She occupied herself with making several baskets, but she worked at several at the same time, first doing a little work on one and then dropping it for another. She made the baskets watertight by placing inside several lumps of asphaltum together with some few heated pebbles. The asphaltum melting she gave the pebbles a rotary motion which soon covered the interior of the baskets with an even watertight coating, after which the pebbles were thrown out. During a storm that threatened to upset the small boat she made signs that she could stop the gale. Kneeling down on deck and facing the wind she began incantations and prayers. When the sky suddenly showed sign of clearing she pointed to it with pride as if to say "see I did it".

She had never been on the mainland before, and she showed great astonishment at every thing she saw. She showed a childish delight when she saw an ox-cart, and quickly immitated the revolving motion of the wheels with her hand and arms. And when a gentleman rode down to the beach she was evidently dumbfounded by seeing him on the horse. She quickly immitated the motion of the horse by placing her first two fingers of her right hand over the thumb of her left hand, and mimicking the galloping of the horse she gave a shout of delight.

She was taken care of by the family of Mr. Nidever and had every thing she wanted. She could however only communicate by signs as there was no one to understand her language. An other old indian woman was said to understand a few words (according to Hittell's History, but I do not find it mentioned in Nidever's account), but otherwise there was none who could understand her. She soon became an expert in using signs, and after a few months made herself well understood that way. She was passionately fond of fruits and would eat them constantly. This brought on a dysentery from which she did not recover. She did not survive more than four months her removal from the island. "She had a warm love, was grateful and affectionate as a child, and was of a gentle and lovable nature". After her death her belongings were gathered together and sent to Rome! except a water bottle made of rushes and covered with asphaltum, which bottle is now in the posession of the California Academy of Sciences San Francisco. It was not until a short time before she died that she understood that they wished to know some thing of her language. Only a few words of hers are now preserved : Hide = tocah; Man = nache; Sky = toygwah; Body = puoochay.

From signs that she made they understood that the wild dogs had eaten her child, and that when she found it out she lay down on the ground and cried. When she at last got up and returned to the schooner it had already left. She had a generous nature and when given trinkets etc. she would soon give them away, just as did the Indians met by Cabrillo and Viscaino.