<hi rend="bold">Island Mystery</hi>

<hi rend="bold">About Kind Mrs. Robinson Crusoe . . . . . . . . . . . Harlan Trott</hi>

The strange story of a Mrs. Robinson Crusoe who lived alone for 18 years on California's deserted San Nicolas Island is being pieced together by a couple of college professors who have been exploring this outermost rock in the windswept Channel Islands.

The professors think San Nicolas very probably was seen by Bartolome Ferrolo when he left Santa Cruz Island on Feb. 18, 1543, to search for other islands reported lying off the inner group. But Juan Rodriquez Cabrlllo's chief pilot must have thought this 32-square-mile rock wasn't worth naming. Capt. Sebastian Vizcaino named it in 1602; but he was way out of his reckoning when he plotted it into his chart.

In 1793, Capt. George Vancouver discovered there was no San Nicolas where Vizcaino's chart showed.

Early fur traders found it later on; and because of all the sea otters playing in the breakers, they named it Sea Otter Isand.

Here is the way Mrs. Crusoe's lonely abode looked to George Davidson when he was charting and sounding for the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey in 1854: 

"Of the Channel Islands this . . . is the driest and most sterile. Two-thirds of the surface of the island is covered with sand, and the remainder with coarse grass. Small patches of scrub oak are found in a few places, but no trees show on the island as made from seaward. It can be seen from the deck of a vessel at a distance of 38 miles. . . ."

Nothing is known about how men first came to San Nicolas, but the earliest settlers &#8212;Indians&#8212;found itmuch more hospitable than it is today. The Indian name for the plate was Ghalashat.

The combined researches of Prof. Clement W. Meighan, University of California at Los Angeles anthropologist, and Santa Barbara geologist Prof. Robert M. Morris lead to these conclusions. The shells of land snails indicate a fairly heavy vegetation at one time and also abundant water. Today there are only a few springs at the northwest end. From all the archaeological remains, San Nicolas was a bustling primitive community.

Dr. Meighan speculates some of the Indian population of Ghalashat may have been recruited for mainland missions by the early Spaniards. In 1835 there were only 20 inhabitants left. That year church authorities at Santa Barbara decided to transfer this small population to the mainland.

One woman for some reason was left behind. From time to time people on the mainland thought about the poor lost Nicoleno, but no action ever was taken to look for her. Many doubted that she still was living. In time she drifted into the legendary limbo of the lost.

One early account shows no search was made for 15 years. Then the mission fathers offered a $200 reward to find her. An otter hunter found an empty hut made of whalebones. In 1853, George Nidever, a Santa Barbara otterman, headed another search party. Nidever found a footprint, the first day ashore, and then a basket of feathers.

The next day, a distant figure was seen plodding up the hill to the whalebone hut. Nidever's search party followed. Inside the hut they found a woman about 50 years old skinning a sea lion. She showed no fear. The Indians in the search party fell on their knees. The woman offered them food&#8212;roots that had been roasted on an open fire.

Her diet consisted of dried seal meat, fish, abalone, and sea urchins. Sewing was done with bone needles. She had a knife made out of a piece of iron hoop stuck into a rough driftwood handle. She wove grass into watertight baskets coated inside with asphalt. San Nicolas isn't very far from Coal Oil Point, where coast surveyor Davidson a hundred years ago found "the smell of petroleum  . . . almost overpowering." The castaway's dress was a single garment made from the skins of a seabird called the "shag" or green cormorant.

She left willingly with Captain Nidever who took her to his home in Santa Barbara and placed her in the care of his Spanish wife. None of the Indians understood the lost woman's language. She seemed to enjoy the community's attentions, visiting various families and dancing for their entertainment.

But she languished in her new environment. In six weeks after she was "rescued" from San Nicolas, the "lost" woman had passed on. Dr. Meighan says this is not unusual in cases where North American Indians were carried to England or Eskimos have been brought to the United States.

Her birdskin dress is said to have been sent to the Vatican. A few other primitive possessions fowarded to San Francisco were destroyed in the 1906 earthquake and fire. The untold part of her story is wrapped in winter fogs or muted in the timeless surge of maelstrom breakers beating against the 800-foot cliffs below the site ot that whalebone hut and the winking 12-mile loom of San Nicolas Island's untended lighthouse.