THE WILD WOMAN OF CALIFORNIA.&#8212;We have heretofore made mention of the existence of a wild Indian woman in Southern California, and the subjoined account, which we find in the San Francisco <emph>Herlad</emph>, confirms the statement.&#8212;The Santa Barbara correspondent of that journal writes under date of Oct. 7th, as follows :

A short time since I called to see the Wild Indian Woman. She is living with Mr. George Nidever, an old Trapper, who has been on this coast for the last 18 years. She was brought from the island of San Nicholas, 70 miles distant, and not from Catalina. No person has yet been found that can understand or speak her language. By signs she has told Mr. N. that her child was killed and torn to pieces by the wild dogs with which the land is overrun. Her only dress was a sort of gown, sitting high upon her shoulders and reaching nearly to the knees, made of the skins and feathers of wild ducks, sewed together with the sinews of the seal. The handicraft shown in the manufacture of her needles, sewing stuffs, baskets, water vessels#8212;to make all of which a piece of the blade of an old knife seems to have been her only tool&#8212;is certainly curious. The water jugs are made of split sea-grass woven tightly together in flask form, and the bottom and part of the sides daubed over with asphaltum, springs of which are on the islands. She has a piece of netting made of sinews, some eight feet square, the knitting of which is precisely similar to that made for fishing. Her food seems to have been chiefly the fat of the seal.&#8212;Of this she brought some twenty pounds with her. It is rancid and smells awfully; still she relishes it. She is very fond of shell fish, coffee and liquor of every sort; but does not care for beef, pork, bread and tea. In person she is by far the best looking Indian I have ever seen on the coast. She has large full eyes; her forehead is low and broad; her nose slightly aquiline and finely formed; her mouth is rather large, and indicates great firmness; her protruding lower lip gives a haughty tone to her look, and her well set chin fully sustains this trait. She is of medium stature, very masculine in appearance, and shows very little evidence of advanced age. Undoubtedly she is the last of her race.