Indians Once Lived on Channel Islands

Hundreds of Years Ago Southland Was Ancient Utopia of Peace

Illustrated on Page 3, Part 1

Southern California, mecca of millions of people today, was an ancient utopia hundreds of years ago during a golden age of peace and prosperity perhaps unequalled in world history. 

Long before the Spanish explorer Cabrillo sailed up the California coast, Southland Indians lived in a blithe and carefree existence in a land of plenty, fishing, hunting and braving the seas on adventurous cruises in fantastic plank boats sewed together with thongs and caulked with asphaltum. 

Hubs of this ancient "shangrila" were such offshore garden spots as Catalina, San Clemente, Santa Barbara, Anacapa, Santa Cruz, Santa Rosa, San Miguel and San Nicolas Islands. On these then lush isles the little known early day Indians of the coastal plain settled and flourished. And on these islands also have been chronicled some of the most fantastic stories of all time, among them the true-life tale of the lost woman of San Nicolas Island, who lived a lonely Robinson Crusoe existence for 18 years on the now desolate wind-gnawed isle.

Facts Uncovered

While the average Californian today knows less about the local channel islands than of Hawaii, scientists during the years have slowly but surely been piecing together the life pattern of the ancient coastal redmen.

Recent expeditions to san Nicolas Island y Stuart Peck, museum technician of the anthropology department of the University of California at Los Angeles, and David Rice, chairman of the Archeological Survey Association of Southern California, have revealed a few more meager details of the peaceful, serene life which the Indians of the once populous islands enjoyed.

Indian artifacts uncovered at San Nicolas Island by Rice and Peck were all of a peaceful nature such as beads, fish hooks, bone awls and trinkets.

Lived In Peace

No war clubs, stone hatchets or arrowheads were found, leading scientists to the belief that the ancient residents of the channel isles lived in a coastal paradise free from fear and strife. Their very peacefulness, history recounts, led to their downfall and ultimate virtual extinction years before American pioneers fought their way through other hostile Indian tribes of the great midwest to California's gold fields. 

Raiding ships of Russian and Aleuts from the far north wrought havoc among these peaceful peoples of the islands to mark the end of the golden era. thus it came about that kindle Spanish Padres of the mainland missions began more than 150 years ago to serve as saviors of this hardy race of sailing redmen.

Raided by Cossacks

Strangely enough, it was the Indians of San Nicolas Island, named by Spanish explorers for the patron saint of Russia, that Cossacks, who killed the men and carried off the women during frequent otter hunting voyages along the coast.

Because of these raids which decimated the prosperous and happy tribes of the islands, the Spanish Padres sent rescue parties to San Nicolas Island, inhabited, back in 1835, and thereby resulted the strange tale of the lost woman of San Nicolas.

Survivors Rounded Up

A Capt. Sparks, an otter hunter, was the emissary of the Santa Barbara Mission Padres who set sail in 1835 for San Nicolas Island accompanied by a squad of Spanish soldiers on the little otter hunting ship Peor es Nada, which translated meant "better than nothing."

At the lonely island, nearly 10 miles off the coast of Port Hueneme, they rounded up the survivors, some 18 San Nicolenos, and loaded them aboard ship.

The Peor es Nada was about to sail when one of the women jumped overboard crying that her baby had been left behind. Before she could return, the story goes, a sudden storm drove the ship to sea and she was left behind.

The Indians were landed on San Pedro, taken to the Mission San Gabriel where they soon pined away and died. Capt. Sparks and the Peor es Nada was lost soon afterward on a trip to San Francisco and never had a chance to return to San Nicolas.

Legend Grew Up

A legend grew up on the mainland about the lost woman and in 1853 Padre Gonzales of the Santa Barbara Mission induced Capt. George Nidever, another otter hunter, to seek her. Capt. Nidever made three trips to the lonely wind-swept island, the last time accompanied by Charles Brown of Santa Barbara and a group of Barbareno Indians, who fanned out on the island and combed it from one end to the other.

The first trace of the woman was found after an arduous search when a basket filled with cormorant feathers was found on the feathers but later found them back in the basket and redoubled their efforts.

Shortly afterward Capt. Nidever came upon the woman as she was busily skinning a seal

Turn to Page 18, Column 2

San Nicolas Island

Continued form Second Page

in front of three small huts made of whale ribs covered with brush and surrounded by a two-foot high brush fence to break the wind.

Ni Signs of Fear

The woman showed no signs of fear according to records left by Brown, and offered the visitors food. By signs she indicated that her baby had been killed years before by wild dogs which infested the island and that she had existed on sea food and seals killed with crude stone weapons.

During the month that Capt. Nidever and his party spent on San Nicolas the woman showed them how she killed the seals at night, made sinew fish lines from them and hooks from abalone which abounded alog [along] the shore. She also showed them will hidden caves and canyons where she hid when marauding Russians and Aleuts visited the lonely isle on foraging and pilfering expeditions.

After gaining an idea of the lonely existence which the woman had led for 18 years, Capt. Nidever and his group returned with her to Santa Barbara where she was taken into the Santa Barbara Mission. Padre Gonzales christened her Juana Maria, to which the people of the town added "Peor Es Nada."

Shunned Circus Offer

Her language was not understood but the woman appeared happy with her new friends and spent much of her time dancing. Capt. Nidever, the story goes, turned down a fabulous offer for her to join a circus sideshow and tour the world. Food on the mainland was new to her, however, and apparently fresh fruits and meats were too great a shock for her system after 45 years of existing on sea food and seal meat, because after six weeks at the mission she took sick and died.

Her dress of bird skins, and her trinkets including bone awls, wooden knives, woven grass bottles and sinew fish lines were given to the padres at the mission and later most of them were sent to the Vatican Museum in Rome, although history recounts that some were destroyed in the great San Francisco fire of 1906.

Was Sole Survivor

Her death marked the passing of the last living Channel Island Indian. She was the sole survivor of a hardy race of peaceful seagoing pioneers, who had known a utopia for hundreds of years. 

Scientists who have scoured San Nicolas Island many times down through the years have never definitely located the hillside upon which her whalebone huts were built. Theory that San Nicolas and other off shore islands may have been a vacation mecca for Indians during the hundreds of years following the Pliocene depression, when the sea stood 1500 feet below its present level, is belied by the hundreds of camp sites, huge shell mounds and kitchen middens which cover the entire area of San Nicolas.

Sites Checked

Fire-blackened earth in the high kitchen middens at San Nicolas are from two to six feet in depth, Rice and Peck discovered on their recent expedition. Some were found high on the top of the island, some 700 to 800 feet above sea level and more than a mile from the ocean shore.

The two scientists checked more than 100 village sites on the rugged island, finding evidences of Indian inhabitation along the shores and on the high plateau which tops the wind-swept isle. Discoveries included some graves, various kinds of mortars and pestles, bone awls, abalone fish hooks, shall and stone beads, asphalt caches, several soapstone carvings obviously Indian toys and scores of other artifacts. Much of the soapstone was apparently imported from Santa Catalina Island. Peck and Rice also found some obsidian which was believed to be from the mainland.

Tools Found

Huge "workshop areas" were found near most of the camp sites located by the scientific party. In one area, high on the plateau and near the quarters now occupied by a small navy group at San Nicolas, a campsite was located where more than 200 broken mortars were discovered, some elaborately carved and others showing indications that they had once been inlaid with abalone shell set it asphalt.

Along the beaches Peck and Rice found tons of unused flakes and discarded tools, revealing a long and dense population on the island in the past. Test pits showed depths of three feet over large areas. Near the beaches there was literally no place one could stop during a five-mile trek, without seeing broken stone ships and tools and the ever present high shell piles. Occupation and important work centers also occurred inland, especially on high points.

Caves Located

At points along the rugged southwest shore of the island the party located two caves, obviously occupied by Indians in the long ago. Ancient carvings of sharks, fish and other things adorned the walls of the larger of the two caves. The second, well hidden by high cliffs and offshore rocks, was covered to a depth of many feet with abalone shells while its fire-blackened walls gave evidence of long use.

Proper excavation, Rice and Peck believe, would probably reveal remains of the sewed-plank boats, caulked with asphalt, that these bold sailors paddled across the many miles between San Nicolas and the mainland and to adjoining islands.

Other Findings

Previous scientists who have visited San Nicolas have characterized its western sand-dune covered end as a "perfect golgotha" of Indian lore. Capt. Chappelle of Catalina, who made many trips to San Nicolas, is credited with having found abalone shells soldered together with asphalt to form boxes in which beads and trinkets were buried.

He also found graves on the great sand spit at the eastern end of the island, each marked with whalebone. Other scientists reported finding a wooden coffin but it was believed to have been of later vintage than the Indian occupation. Rice and Peck found some evidences of cremation.

Now Missile Center

Today San Nicolas, farthest seaward of all the channel islands, is a part of the Navy's big guided missile center at Point Magu. 

But scientists occasionally are allowed to visit the island and delve into the mysteries of the past along the cave-infested, wind-gnawed shore where the wind and the sand have worked marvels in cutting out exquisite traceries, lattices and serrations in the weird canyons which lead up to its usually fog-shrouded plateau-like top which rises to a peak some 907 feet above sea level.

There the howling wind ceaselessly uncovers and covers again the hundreds of Indian skeletons, trinkets and tools which still remain undiscovered.
