<hi rend="bold">The Lost Woman of San Nicolas</hi>

"That is San Nicolas island, where the Mission fathers say a woman lived alone, cut off from the rest of the world for nealy twenty years."

The guide pointed due south to where on the horizon a low, indistinct cloud could barely be discerned.

A party of sighseers had climbed up on the mountain trail north of Santa Barbara to the summit of one of the peaks, and had viewed with delight the little town, transfigured by distance and the height from which we looked, the round foothills about it covered with the soft midwintergreen, the silver ribbon of the surf edging the dark blue of the channel, and beyond, thirty to fifty miles away, yet seeming only a quarter as far, the islands of Santa Rosa, Santa Cruz and Anacape. The guide had shown us between sea and sky the dot he called Santa Barbara island, and then drew our attention to San Nicolas.

He was not able to give us the particulars of the story, but next day, sitting on the Mission portico overlooking the gardens, the yellow, weather-beaten walls speaking of the long-ago Spanish days, we heard the pathetic tale from one who had been almost an actor in it, old Padre Pujol.

"I knew Mercedes Garciduena when she was a slip of a girl attending the Mission school," said the padre. "It is more than sixty years ago now, yet I remember the handsome child as if it were last week. She was the gayest and brightest, and with all her willfullness, the best-loved of Padre Juan's pupils. When she grew up and fell in love with dashing young Pedro Olivas, it was to the old priest that she owed her father's reluctant consent to her marriage.

"Pedro was the best vaquero within a hundred mils of Santa Barbara, and in the processions on fiestas and the "Sixteenth" he was the finest rider as well as the handsomest man among the caballeros. But although a really superior fellow of his calss, he was hardly a match for Mercedes. Her father, a blue-blooded Spaniard, who had been exiled from Mexico after one of the political upheavals, felt bitter about the marriage; for although poor, he was proud as Lucifer.

"As things came out, it was a great pity that the marriage ever took place; but neither Padre Juan not any one else could foresee that after ten years of exile Senor Garciduena was to be recalled to his Mexican honors, and that the son-in-law whom he could tolerate in poverty would be unendurable in prosperity. But so God willed it. Mercedes had to make the hard choice between her father and her husband; and loyalty refusing to leave her husband, she saw her father go from her forever. It caused her the deepest pain she had ever known, for although he had never been quite the same to her since the marriage, she loved him passionately. Pobrecita, it was only the beginning of her troubles. Bravely she choked her sobs, and smiled with the dull ache in her breast, until her mind was engrossed with other cares.

"A month or two after the birth of her baby, Pedro was given cahrge of a band of Indians, who were to slaughter the cattle on San Nicolas. This is a strange little island, with periods of fertility and barrenness. For a few years it may be richly covered with alfilaria, and considering its size, is the best of the islands for stock-raising. Then, without any apparent cause, the sea will pile up on the sand on the beach, and the wind began to drive it inland, covering the rich pasture, and making a desert of almost the whole island. Such a period had come after several years of profitable stock-raising, and the cattle were to be killed for the hides and tallow. As the work would take two or three months, Mercedes elected to go with her husband.

"Just before they left, I was ordered to the San Francisco mission, and only when I returned five years later, did I hear the sad story of Pedro's death and Mercedes' disappearance.

"Pedro, it appeared, having completed his work, and seen to the shipment of the hides and tallow on one of the big American vessels that in those days came around the Horn to buy these products, had come to Santa Barbara in a small boat to make arrangements for bringing off his men and their families.

"It was the year 1846, and Pedro, reaching the town early in August, found it in wild excitement ever the threatened American invasion. More history had been made in the few months of his absence on the island than in all his life in Santa Barbara before. The Bear Flag rebellion had taken place, and war had now broken out between Mexico and the United States. Pio PIco, the governor, had impressed all able-bodied men into a force to resist attack; and Pedro, nothing loath, since he knew all would be well on the island for a few weeks, was ordered to join the force. A few days later Commedore Stockton anchored off the town and demanded its surrender. When this was refused, a body of sailors landed, and in the fighting that followed several men were killed. Poor Pedro's daring made him on e of the first victims.

"More than a month passed before the boat for which he had come could be dispatched to San Nicolas. The Indian families were then brought over, but Mercedes was left behind. It was a cold, damp evening when the open boat reached the landing place, and clouds banking up on the horizon gave promise of an early storm. The captain, knowing that if a storm should come, it might be a week before he could land his passengers at Santa Barbara, determined to put back the same night, feeling secure that by sailing at once he coiuld land before the storm should break. Mercedes' little one had been ailing, and rather than expose the infant to the cold and rain of the long night voyage, she said she would wait until the boat should return for the belongings of the camp. One of the Indian women wished to remain with her, but Mercedes refused to separate her from her friends. The boat was expected to return in a few days; and in the confusion of the hurried embarkation, the cruelty of leaving her alone with the heart-breaking news the boat had brought, was little noticed by the stolid Indians and the rough boatmen.

"The troublous times caused the elapse of two weeks before the boat again set out for the island: Padre Juan, consumed with anxiety for Mercedes, went with it; but on reaching the island, he could find no trace of Mercedes and her babe. The crew spent two days in gathering up the effects of the camp, and Padre Juan searched high and low without avail. In the house she had occupied moldy fragments of food, rusted cooking utensils and the dust gave evidence that she had been absent many days. Knowing that boats from San Pedro sometimes visited the island, the sailors concluded she had been taken to the mainland by one of them; and with this hope Padre Juan was obliged to content himself.

"Inquiries up and down the mainland coast, however, failed to get any response that would throw light upon her disappearance. Never a word came to disclose the fate of the poor girl. It remained one of the dark mysteries of the sea. Some thought a smuggling vessel might have picked her up and carried her to a far distant land. Smugglers were not uncommon, although San Nicolas is farther out than they usually thought it necessary to stay. The favorite theory among the people of Santa Barbara was that Mercedes, alone on that desolate isle, brooding over her father's relentlessness, Pedro's death and her child's illness, became unbalanced and destroyed both her baby and herself.

"Padre Juan's declining years were clouded and his life shortened by the tragic fate of his favorite. He spent much of his time in making inquiries among such travelers and seafaring men as came to Santa Barbara. Especially he cultivated the smugglers and their friends. As his hopes died away, he sunk into apathy, hardly noticing anything about him, and rousing himself only to ask his brothers of the Mission whether he had been to blame for his part in bringing about Mercedes' marriage. He died with two years, and was buried at his request in the mound yonder overlooking the sea.

"Years and years passed away In the many alterations brought by the American, the discovery of gold, the great influx of people and the changes in the mode of life, the smaller islands were almost forgotten, and the story of San Nicolas became a faint memory. So far as is known the island was never visited again until the spring of 1864 a party from Santa Barbara explored the lesser islands in quest of game.

"Finding the rocks and coves of San Nicolas thickly peopled with otters, the hunters remained several days. One of them, going a mile or so into the interior, found a rude hut built against a huge rock overlooking a little valley. In front of the hut a fireplace contained the ashed of a recent fire, and hanging inside was what appeared to be the dress of a woman. Before leaving the island all the party went to see the place. They concluded it must have been the camp of hunters that had been there but a short time before, and they wondered at the smallness of the hut, its air of permanency, and more than all, at the old dress.

"When they returned to Santa Barbara and told what they had seen, the story of Mercedes Garciduena was revived. A painful interest stirred the community. People that remembered the bright, handsome girl, her happy childhood, sorrowful wedded life and strange disappearance  looked at one another with the question in their eyes they could hardly put into words. A party was quickly made up to go to the island and search it from end to end. I was asked to be one of the party, because, of the few now left of those who had known and loved her in the happy days of her youth, I seemed to be the nearest.

"Never can I forget the morning we found her. One of those beautiful spring mornings when the sea is laughing, the sky cloudless, the poppies and lilies gathered in tens of thousands to dance their joy, as if earth had no such thing as sorrow. The sands had retreated from the island, and once again it was a garden of loveliness. It seemed a mockery that this should be the scene of such a story."

The priest paused, gazing for some moments into vacancy, his eyes filling with tears. Then, before he went on, he spent some time in counting the beads of his rosary.

"Poor lost Mercedes was found. But the gay and handsome Spanish girl we knew eighteen years before was an aged, decrepit woman, her once bright faculties heavy and dull. We found her within a mile of the western end of the island, where we landed. The captain and I came suddenly upon her seated in a camp formed by a low wall of rocks. She was weaving willow shoots together, making a kind of basket. Her dress was of feathers held in a network of sinew cords. Under a roof of boughs in a corner of the enclosure hung the dress of faded cloth, which the hunters had seen, and which had evidently been carefully kept during her eighteen years of solitude. Who shall tell why?

"Two or three of the men, extended in a line across the valley, were gradually approaching, and, watching these attentively, she did not at first perceive us. When at last we called her attention to ourselves, she at once arose, without any sign of fear or surprise, and making a curtsey, gave us a smiling welcome as she beckoned us into the camp. In speaking with her we found that while she apparently understood all we said, her speech was to us unintelligible.

"When the party had assembled and we asked her to go down to the bat, she hesitated with a look of perplexity; then, going outside, she began to pick the flowers. Having gathered a large bunch, she walked about fifty yards away and knelt down. We followed her movements curiously. Unable to see what she was doing, we drew nearer, and then saw she had spread the flowers over a little mound surmounted by a rude cross. In a few minutes she was ready to go.

"Arrived here, the whole people, Spanish and American, those who had known her in the old days as well as those who had come since, seemed to vie with each other to make pleasant the rest of her life. But there was little that could be done. Her wants were few, and her mind remained darkened, only gentleness and a desire to do little kindnesses showing itself like an instinct. She was never able to give a clear account of her life upon the island. In a few months she sickened and died, and attended by the whole population in funeral procession, she was laid to rest by the side of Padre Juan, who loved her so well, and had sorrowed for her so grievously.

"God rest her soul," said the padre, in conclusion, and we all reverently echoed "Amen."

JAMES E. REYNOLDS.