Archeologists Bare Channel Islands' Secret; Story Of Mother Love Delayed 90 Years

Ghost On San Nicholas Island, Was Indian Mother Who Would Not Leave Her Baby

<hi rend="bold">By GARBER DAVIDSON</hi>

ABOARD CAPT. NIDEVER'S SCHOONER, SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA, Aug. 8, 1853&#8212;(Delayed 90 Years)&#8212;A story of mother love just completed by archeologists in July, 1943) [sic]&#8212;The sea is a stubborn wench who loves a mystery, but today, after 18 years of tantalizing sailors with a choice secret, she gave up the secret of the ghost of the Channel Islands.

This ghost lived on deserted San Nicholas Island, 65 miles off San Pedro. Sailors who passed the island told of seeing silhouetted on its low sky-line, a dark, human-like figure. Occasionally hunters told of ghostly footprints on the beach. The island was barren, windswept and uninhabieted [uninhabited].

The mission fathers on the mainland did not believe in ghosts. They persuaded Capt. George Nidever of Santa Barbara, a California pioneer, sea otter hunter and Indian fighter, to search the arid island.

His diary of this August day in 1853 read&#8212;"At a distance along a high ridge we saw a small, black object. As we neared we saw that it was a woman in an open hut. She was old. She was an Indian, busily employed in stripping blubber from a piece of seal skin held across one knee.

"Charley (one of the crew) stepped around in front of her, and, instead of showing any alarm, she was dressed in cormorant skins, her hair was matted and she appeared to be in good health."

The diary proceeds. She was the silhouette the passing ships had seen. She made the footprints. She was the last living link with an ancient civilization on this island.

Eighteen years previously, says the diary, the mission fathers heard that the Indian people on the island were starving and sent Isaac Sparks to remove the islanders.

Sparks and his crew gathered the surviving dozen Indian men, woman and children on the beach. Just as they were preparing to leave, one young woman demanded that she be permitted to go back to the village for her baby. This was granted, but a squall came up and Sparks, fearing his ship would be wrecked, took the Indians he had and sailed for San Pedro.

Why the Indian mother was not rescued for the next 18 years had not been determined. When Capt. Nidever found her, she was alone. Later she made known in sing language that her baby had been killed by wild dogs. All those years she spent on the barren land which was the infant's grave.

Coming now to July 1943, some of this story has been confirmed, and its long background unearthed by Arthur Wood[w]ard, archeologist for the Los Angeles County Museum, and associates, this group has just completed the records, found in graves and village sites, of the Channel Islands, San Nicholas, Santa Catalina, Santa Cruz, San Miguel and Santa Rosa.

On one expedition, Woodward followed the explicit directions of Capt. Nidever to the place where the lone mother was found. Woodward's party came upon a hut, presumably the one where the Indian mother had lived. Still standing were 19 whalebones and a shoulder bone which had been the framework of the hut.

As the scientists pieced out the pre-history of her ancestors, the Channel Islands were inhabited by sea-bred Indian fishermen, for unknown ages before the Spaniards arrived.

A typical day in one of these villages would reveal men, probably naked, with hair tied in knots on the tops of their heads, starting out to fish. They would have well-constructed plank canoes, made from driftwood and caulked with tar from sea-bottom deposits. Their equipment would include sea-grass nets and lines, sea otter harpoons, shell fish[h]ooks and bone-implements.

The women, [in] sea-grass skirts, would be working over open fires, cooking acron [acorn] meal or fish stews in soapstone pots. They might be making delicately wrought shell pendants and other ornaments.

Their huts had bone frameworks and probably were covered with sea-grass matting.

Material collected by archeologists, entomologists and other scientists indicates that these Indians subsisted almost entirely on what they could get from the sea. The islands appear to have been too barren for agriculture.

When the Spaniards appeared on the coast, some of the islanders drifted to the mainland. During the first part of the 19th century there was a rapid decline in the island populations, due mainly to the diseases of civilization.

What finally happened to the lone mother is a good example. She was taken to the mainland, baptized and christened Juana Maria. But civilization's bounty was too much for her. She died in a few weeks. Capt. Nidever recorded that he thought her death was due to eating too much fruit.