[...]

In presenting novels dealing with native peoples, instructors should notice a basic paradox. Traditional literatures were essentially communal. Tricksters, legendary heroes, and historical personages were important as they reflected cultural values rather than as individuals. Novels, on the other hand, deal with individual personalities. Thus we should be aware that, no matter how factually accurate an author may be in the treatment of physical and cultural traits of the characters, in dealing with the inner lives of specific characters and in methods of presentation, the writer of a children's novel about native peoples may be more influenced than he or she realizes by the attitudes and conventions of Western literature. This point may be demonstrated by comparing two novels by nonnative writers with two native writers.

Scott O'Dell's <emph>Island of the Blue Dolphins</emph> is the account of a California native girl's eighteen years of isolation on an offshore island. In <emph>Julie of the Wolves</emph>, Jean Craighead George describes a modern Alaskan Eskimo girl surviving an arctic winter with the aid of a pack of wolves. Both are based on extensive research into the cultural and geographical aspects; however, in structure and presentation of the main characters, both use conventions of the Western novel. As survival novels, they follow the pattern of separation, survival, rescue, and reunion. The greater part of each focuses on the physical and psychological endurance of the central character. "How to do it" chapters detail the ways the isolated individual remembers and utilizes the techniques of her culture to obtain physical necessities. Chapters centering on the inner life often reveal the character recalling the spiritual elements of the social group and understanding their value.

Inherent in the conventions of the survival novel as they are used in these two books are adventure and psychological analysis. In life-threatening situations, the central characters must display considerable physical ability and inner courage. However, by the very nature of their situations, they are unique. They face inner and outer pressures not normally encountered by members of the culture. Thus, unlike traditional native narratives, the characters are not representative. As the central figures in their novels, they are the subject of detailed study and their inner conflicts are fully presented. Filled with hatred of the Aleuts, who killed her father and brother, Karena, in <emph>Island of the Blue Dolphins</emph>, must learn to overcome her intense loathing. Julie, who is fleeing to San Francisco in George's novel, comes to understand the value of the old ways, which she had originally scorned.

In addition to conventions of the survival novel, George includes in <emph>Julie of the Wolves</emph> elements of pastoralism. The contrasts between a sullied, artificial, complex urban world representing progress, greed, anxiety, and ambition, and a rural world that is natural, pure, and calm, are reflected in that between San Francisco, Barrow, and Kangik, on the one hand, and the seal camp and the tundra, on the other. In the end, the heroine discovers that she cannot recover the ideal world and must return to her father, who has capitulated to the values of civilization. George also incorporates aspects of the problem novel, a genre widely used in young adult fiction of the past two decades. Julie's difficulties are increased by government intervention, which disrupts her happy life by sending her to school and by attempting to send her father to Vietnam; by her uncle's alcoholism; by peer pressures to accept the modern ways; and by the failure of her father to maintain his cultural integrity.

Neither O'Dell nor George would claim to be presenting insiders' narratives; they are knowledgeable and sympathetic outsiders. Two authors who do write from the inside are Markoosie, an Inuit from arctic Canada, the author of <emph>Harpoon of the Hunter</emph>, and Jamake Highwater, the author of <emph>Anpao: An American Indian Odyssey</emph>, who until recently claimed to be of Blackfoot-Cherokee heritage. In both these works we see a mixture of novelistic techniques and conventions of traditional narratives. <emph>Harpoon of the Hunter</emph> is a naturalistic survival story in which Karnik, a young Inuit, travels with several other villagers in pursuit of a rabid polar bear. Although the other members of the party are all killed, he survives and is rescued. However, when several members of his family and his new wife drown crossing broken river ice, he commits suicide, running himself onto his harpoon. Anpao is a highly symbolic, almost surrealistic account of a young man's journey to the Sun. If the Sun, who is his father, will remove the scar the youth wears on his face, he may return to earth to marry. However, when Anpao returns to his village, he finds that the arrival of the white man signals destruction to his people. With his bride and a faithful few, he travels beneath the waters of a nearby lake, where life everlasting can be found.

[...]