CATALINA ISLAND'S LOST TRIBE,

Strange People Who Lived by Themselves.

Dialect of the California Indian Unknown to Them.

A Raid by Sea After Hunters Cost the Natives Many Lives&#8212;The Squaw Hermit.

In a paper by Mr. C. F. Holder printed in THE HERALD of November 30th, mention is made of a theory regarding the islands lying off the coast and to the south of Point Concepcion, to the effect that the islands are vestiges of a sunken continent that was inhabited by a race of people other than found upon the American continent at the time of its discovery by Europeans.

In support of this theory it is stated by the writer that Dr. Carr found human skulls upon the island of Santa Catalina differing so far from the skulls of people now inhabiting the earth as to warrant a belief that they were the skulls of an entirely different and extinct race. It may be pertinent to enquire of Mr. Holder what length of time human skulls would retain their form and structure if exposed on the surface or buried in the ground, under climatic conditions like those of Santa Catalina. Another circumstance referred to by Mr. Holder in support of the theory is that a woman brought from the island of St. Nicholas could not speak any one of the dialects spoken by the Indians along the shore of California.

SCRAPS OF INDIAN HISTORY.

At the time of the founding of the missions of Upper California, the islands of Santa Rosa, Santa Cruz and Catalina were all inhabited by Indians, brought over to the mainland and incorporated into the Indian communities of the missions. Intercourse had previously been kept up between the Indians living on the islands and those on the mainland, and from their proximity to the mainland, the mission fathers had no difficulty in gathering them into the fold of the Roman Catholic church. The distance to St. Nicholas however, was so great that the fathers and the soldiers, who guarded them, had no intercourse with the inland tribes.

In 1832 there were, and had been for many years, two Indian villages in the town of Los Angeles; one was near the intersection of Aliso and Alameda streets, the people of which were of and they spoke the same dialect as the San Gabriel Indians. The other village was near where the crossing of Eighth and San Pedro streets now is. These people, or their ancestors, had come from Santa Catalina, and their dialect differed slightly from that of the other village.

POTTERY WORKERS.

There were in this latter village some elderly men who were stonecutters. These men occasionally visited their "fatherland," and occupied themselves with making pots and other cooking utensils from soapstone found on the island. The utensils they disposed of at the missions and to the inhabitants of the town. It was known to the people of California that in 1818, or about that time, a vessel belonging to the Russian-American Fur company, engaged in hunting sea fur-bearing animals, with a crew of Kodiac Indian hunters, visited the island of St. Nicholas, and while there a dispute arose between the other hunters and the natives. During a battle that followed nearly all the natives were killed. It was known in the early part of the fourth decade of this century to a few men who were engaged in hunting sea otter around the islands lying off this coast that there were native inhabitants living on the island of St. Nicholas.

TAKEN FROM THE ISLAND.

In 1836 Captain James Johnson and Isaac Williams, both residents of Los Angeles, sent a boat to that island to bring the Indians to Los Angeles. Only seven people were found, and comprised an elderly man and woman, a man and woman about 40 years of age respectively, one girl of about 18 years and two boys of 14 or 15 years each. While the boat's crew were busy with other matters the old woman escaped. The remaining six were taken to Los Angeles and taken into the families of Captain Johnson and Mr. Williams as servants, and were treated in the same manner as other Indian servants. They did not speak the same dialect of any of the Indians of the mainland with the exception of the girl, who was a halfbreed; the others were all Indians and not distinguishable from the native Indian of California.

A CHARACTER AT SAN PEDRO.

Whether from a radical change in their diet or from some other cause, the islanders that were brought to Los Angeles soon fell sick and it was not long before all of them were dead, except the old man, who recovered with the loss of his sight. He found his way to San Pedro, where he lived a number of years, spending most of his time along the beach gathering such shellfish for food as he could find on the rocks at low tide.

Some years later George Neidever of Santa Barbara, who devoted much of his time to hunting sea otter, was at the Island of St. Nicholas and brought from thence to Santa Barbara the woman that had been left by the Johnson and Williams party. She was very old and owing to her lonely life had lost the power of speech. There was nothing in her physical appearance to distinguish her from the Indian race on this coast.

J. J. WARNER.	