A WOMAN'S LOG OF 1849.

FROM THE DIARY OF MRS. JOHN MCDOUGALL.

[THESE notes are, as their title purports, brief daily jottings at sea, without attempt at literary form. They were made on the first outward trip of the "California,"(--)a name that shall be to our children's children a classic, as is the Mayflower.

Mrs. McDougall was one of the comparatively few women passengers of that vessel when, on February 28, 1849, it entered the Bay of San Francisco,(--)whose waters it was the first steamship ever to break.

Of that voyage of our western Argo and its Argonauts much has been written. But of its return trip(--)for which the world (this province being quite out of it) waited intently(--)this is, so far as I know, the first published record.

Concerning most of those who are mentioned in these notes, inquiry has elicited but little. Some, however, are of local, and others of national, distinction.  The Major Canby is the General E. R. S. Canby of the Civil and Indian wars.  Colonel J. D. Stevenson was one of the first United States military commanders of the Pacific Coast, and largely influential in the forming of the State government of  California. He is still, at the age of ninety years, actively engaged in the practice of law in San Francisco,(--)the picture of hale and courtly age. From him I learned that Doctor (William C.) Parker was one of his staff, and now lives at Santa Cruz; and that the Colonel (R. B.) Mason is the one who was for a time the Military Governor of California. The Mr. Willey is the Rev. Dr. S. H. Willey to whom California is, perhaps, mainly indebted for its University, and who is still prominent in educational and religious affairs.  To Captain (J. L.) Folsom, then Quartermaster, is imputed the distinction of chiefly determining the metropolis of the coast to be at San Francisco, and not at Benicia, by retaining the federal offices at the former city,(--)or sand-hills,  (--)which was done against strenuous opposition. Rev. (0. C.) Wheeler, who came to the territory as a missionary,  has been for many years an official of  the Southern Pacific Railroad Company. Mrs. Ogden, was the wife of Major Ogden, of General Persifer F. Smith's company.	

Of the California herself I learn merely that, after her disuse in the passenger traffic, she served some years in the Australian coal trade, and a few years since  was "dismantled and broken up."      

The diary is given  substantially as  written, with some omissions(--)not indicated in the text(--)and a few notes and conjectures indicated by brackets.

<i>W. H. McD.</i>]

<i>May I, Tuesday Morning</i>.(--)This is the day we are to bid adieu to San Francisco and, with the exception of leaving my husband [then absent, I believe, at the mines] and three or four friends, I confess I leave it without regret.

The morning is very gloomy and unpleasant. We left Mr. Bawden's house at half past nine o'clock and walked down to the point, Colonel John Stevenson and Doctor Parker overtaking us on the way. Mr. and Mrs. Wheeler, Mrs. Goodwin, Captain Folsom, and Mr. and Mrs. Grimes came down to the steamer soon afterward. We sat and talked some time,(--)made merry, or tried to, but many were the sad hearts. Friends were parting, perhaps forever; some with a long and dangerous journey before them, and others . . . . where comforts cannot be procured even for gold. Mr. and Mrs. Bawden, Colonel Stevenson, Doctor Parker, and myself embarked on a whale boat for the steamer at half past ten.  Found the California as cold and cheerless as ever, though much cleaner than on her trip up.

At two o'clock we left San Francisco for Saucelito, where we have lain ever since, getting on water. Had a very poor dinner of roast beef and yams about three o'clock. I regretted very much leaving Mr. Bawden, the Colonel, and the Doctor, who have shown me great kindness since I have been in California ; the two  latter seem more like brothers than anything else.

Saucelito is a little cove in among the hills, a very picturesque place although the hills are barren of trees. Very fine water here, and easy of access for vessels.

<i>Eight o'clock</i>.(--)We are just done tea, and being tired, cold, and low-spirited, I determined to go to bed, hoping to waken tomorrow morning in the Bay of Monterey. 



<i>May 2, Wednesday</i>.(--)Was quite sick last night, but after breakfast felt able to go on deck and take a look at Monterey. It has one of the most beautiful situations I ever saw, on the sides of several hills, which, sloping back from the bay, are partially covered with dark pines, and partly with nothing but green grass. It has the appearance of beautiful green meadows, but I am told it is all parched up later in the year.

We arrived here about ten o'clock. Major Canby and Mr. Willey came on board.  They seem like old friends, as we came out from New Orleans together. [Their voyage from that port to Chagres was on the Falcon, the first  steamer to sail from the States on the California route, leaving New Orleans December 18, 1848.] Mrs. Canby sent me a package of letters, a most beautiful bouquet, some eggs and dried apples, by Colonel Mason ; all very acceptable presents, as we had a hard time to get anything to eat on the steamer.

At twelve o'clock we hoisted anchor and went out to sea: The sea is always very rough passing Point Conception [Point Carmel?].  Too sick to write.



<i>May 3, Thursday Morning</i>(--)We were awakened last night at twelve o'clock by the most alarming of all sounds at sea, (--)"The ship is on fire !" Great was the excitement; the women and children were screaming; gentlemen, just roused from sleep, coming out half dressed, to inquire what was the matter; others running with water. It was some time before the ladies would be assured there was no danger. The fire, as it was supposed to be, proved to be only the friction of the wheel where it went into a mortise, I believe. There would have been danger if it had not been discovered in time.

The sea is still very rough, and neglecting to have our port-holes closed, both George [George McDougall, her brother-in-law] and I had our staterooms filled with water, and he had a fine salt shower-bath.

At half-past one o'clock we dropped anchor off the port of Santa Barbara, a very pretty place on an inclined plane that ascends gradually from the beach. About midway to the top of the hill is a mission with a very fine church,(--)gardens, orchards,  etc.,  attached  to  it. With Yankee enterprise it might be made one of the garden spots of the earth, as all kinds of fruits and flowers grow almost spontaneously. But the people are so indolent that we could get no supplies for the ship, not even milk, though we could see from the ship hundreds of  cows grazing over the hills. The harbor is very bad for ships, as the kelp grows so thick that it is almost impossible to get a ship through it. It grows twenty feet long, and is strong as a cable.

In coming to Santa Barbara we passed an island about sixty miles from the coast, on which there is a lone woman living. The Russians, some years ago, had a party there catching otter ; a storm coming up they were obliged to put out to sea, leaving some of their party on shore. They afterwards returned and got them all off but this woman, who has lived there alone ever since.

Some three years ago they caught her, but she was perfectly wild and had lost her speech, so they left her.

About four o'clock we hoisted anchor and left Santa Barbara. Sea rough; seasick!



<i>May 4, Friday</i>.(--)Was awakened this morning by Turner [her man-servant], who brought me in some tea and nice toast,(--)very acceptable, as we do not breakfast until after nine. After breakfast went on deck to look at the Mission of St. John's, situated in a small valley surrounded with hills, which at this season of the year are covered with flowers. If it could always be spring in California it would be a beautiful country, but nine months of the year it is parched and barren. They have no lightning here. 

Between three and  four o'clock  we entered the harbor of San Diego, the entrance to which is very narrow and sometimes hazardous. After you are in you are completely surrounded with hills covered with grass and flowers, but not a tree to be seen. We anchored near the shore, on which were two or three small huts and a few graves of foreigners, on the side of the hill with a white railing around, in full view to remind us of what may be our destiny before we reach home. 

The ship Edith was in the harbor landing government troops, for the line of the United States is only four or five miles below. The town of San Diego we saw in the distance, some three or four miles around the bay, but it looked barren and desolate. After remaining about an hour we set off again a short while before dark.



<i>May 6, Sunday</i>.(--)Captain Thomas read the Episcopal service in the cabin. Most of the lady passengers responded. It is the first time I ever heard it at sea and it reminded me of home.

Am now writing in my berth. Have been reading "The Inheritance," by Miss Turner. After tea Captain Forbes and Mrs. Ogden gave us some sacred music on the accordion and with their voices. We have run 251 miles in the last twenty-four hours.



<i>May 7, Monday</i>.(--)Great excitement last night,(--)a man missing and supposed to be overboard. Of course all his faults were buried in the deep with him, and he was eulogized as the best fireman, most capable man on the ship, etc. About breakfast time he was discovered in the carpenter's room enjoying a comfortable sleep. One poor Spaniard today lost seven pounds of gold dust overboard ; all, it is said, the poor fellow had.



<i>May 8, Tuesday</i>.(--)Doubled  Cape St. Lucas about twelve o'clock last  night. Felt sick all day owing to want of proper food, as we have very little but mutton. Anchored off the port of Mazatlan about ten o'clock to-night.



<i>May 9, Wednesday</i>.(--)Early this morning we came into the bay.  After breakfast Mrs. Bawden, Mrs. Grimes,  Mrs. Ogden,	Mrs.	Smith,	Messrs. Gaur, Thomas, Murphy, Brown, Colonel Mason, and I, went ashore together in one of the ship's boats.	We went to Captain Mott's house and found it very cool and pleasant, and the ladies very agreeable. Mr. Talbott went with Mrs. Bawden, Mrs. Grimes, and myself, to some of the stores, bought a few articles, and returned to Mr. Mott's, where we had a very fine luncheon of fruits, melons, etc. Took a walk to the beach; went into Mr. Kelly's house(--)found it quite a palace.  Mr. and Mrs. and Miss Kelly were very agreeable and we had a delightful call. Mr. Talbott got one of the Custom House boats and came off with us to the ship. Were delighted with Mazatlan. 



<i>May 10, Thursday</i>.(--)Entered the port of San Blas this morning.	Mrs. Bawden's birthday.	She treated the ladies to some champagne and cake, and Turner brought us a very nice lunch, and we had a cozy little time in our rooms ;(--)as there is a door between we can throw them into one.

The site of San Blas is very romantic, (--)hills and valleys overlooking a bay dotted with  islands;  most of them, though, of barren rocks. The town itself is a poor, miserable village with thatched houses.	A large  party of Americans arrived here today from across the country, on their way to California. May their golden dreams be realized ! as their ideas of comfort never can be.



<i>May 11, Friday</i>.(--)A very beautiful morning. The passengers very much frightened by the steamer stopping suddenly and with a great jar about four o'clock this afternoon. Some of the machinery out of order and soon rectified.



<i>May 13, Sunday</i>.(--)and what a Sunday it is! We are in the port of Acapulco. The passengers have most of them gone on shore, and the natives are flocking on board by dozens, running fore and aft, up and clown stairs, chattering in Spanish.  It is impossible to read, and the day is excessively warm, the bay is entirely shut in by hills, and there can be no breeze. This is probably the best protected harbor in the world.

We hear at this place of two ships that are out at sea without a drop of water. Some of the passengers came off here in a small boat, procured water, and went off in search of their ship, but could not find her. Several other attempts have been made to find the ship, but as yet without success. Three or four beacon fires are lighted on the different hills tonight. Heaven grant they may see them and be enabled to reach this port, for to die of thirst must be horrible. The captain of our steamer is taking on a large supply of water, in the hope that we may fall in with them tomorrow. It is said here that four men came from Panama here in a whale boat, alternately sailing and rowing, in eighteen days,(--)a distance of thirteen hundred miles.  It seems almost incredible.



<i>May 14, Monday</i>.(--)We left Acapulco this morning, and are again in the open sea, not to leave it again until we arrive at Panama, if we meet with no misfortune. Have not seen anything of the ships that are in distress.

[Later.](--)About three o'clock this afternoon we came in sight of a sail. The captain, thinking it might be one of the ships, came alongside of her, and on hailing her and asking if she wanted anything, they cried out, "Water."

They had been eighty days out from Valparaiso, and had been on short allowance of water for forty days. The captain sent them two large casks of water and some fruit and melons, for which they seemed very grateful, and sent in return four large hams and a box of champagne, over which we had a very merry dinner ; indeed, I have not seen so much enjoyment and good feeling among the passengers since we left.



<i>May 17, Thursday</i>.(--)We	are very short of coal, and as there is a pretty fair wind today the engine is stopped and all sails set. We are going at the rate of four or five miles an hour,(--)slow traveling. The captain kept us a day at San Blas, where there was plenty of coal, and did not get any. He is certainly to be blamed for not supplying the ship better, but Mr. H(--)(--), Mr. G(--)(--), Mrs. B(--)(--), and Mrs. G(--)(--), can grumble enough for the whole ship, so I take it easy.

Went on deck after tea. Captain Thomas sang us "The Bride" and "The Rose of Allandale." Afterward Captain Forbes got out his accordion and played while he and Captain Thomas sang. We are over seven hundred miles from Panama yet.



<i>May 18, Friday</i>.(--)Last night one of the sailors was heard to say something to one of his companions that sounded very much like mutiny, and was construed as such by Mr. Johnson, who heard it. We reported it to the captain and it spread like wildfire. Great excitement prevailed, for all expected that before morning blood would be shed. Measures were instantly taken to resist an attack. All the gentlemen passengers were put on the watch, eight at a: time, for four hours. The muskets and arms were all brought out of the hold and put in order. Every part of the ship was watched. It was supposed to be the intention of the sailors, twenty­ four in number, to kill all the passengers when they were asleep, and then to rob the ship, as there is a large amount of gold on board. Very little sleeping was done by any on board, and the watch was kept up all night until after breakfast.

But it proved a jolly morning, for Mr. Hobbs, who can make fun out of anything, got some persons to prefer charges against several of those on watch. Had a mock court. Mr. "Oregon," as he is called, was dressed up with <i>chapeau</i> and sword, and made orderly sergeant to bring up the criminals, who, after some funny remarks and questions, were fined six bottles of champagne, which were brought out and drunk in great glee.

Withal we had a very jolly morning, but before dinner they all got impatient at the slow rate we were going, only from half a mile to two miles an hour, and after some debate a few questions were written down, signed, and sent in to the captain,(--)as to how much coal he had and when he was going to use it,(--)which he answered very satisfactorily to them, and they were in better spirits by teatime. But the captain seems very much depressed. We have a fine wind, however, now. The watch is to be kept up tonight again. Heaven grant we may all get safely home!



<i>May 19, Saturday</i>.(--)Another court martial this morning served to while away the tedious hours. The men were busy all day fixing the wheels, and about three o'clock we were off again with the steam.



<i>May 20, Sunday</i>,(--)and a very lovely morning. Had two very refreshing showers before eleven o'clock, at which time we assembled on deck, and, with a very calm sea below us and a bright sky above, Captain Thomas read the Episcopal service. It was very solemn and impressive, and will long be remembered by me. It seems as though we were nearer our Creator amidst the vast ocean, and the prayers and hymns seem addressed to Him in person. This evening, Mrs. Ogden, Mrs. Bawden, Captain Thomas, Mr. Johnson, and Mr. "Oregon," have been singing some sacred music on deck. It was really very sweet but made me sad, for thoughts of home would intrude.



<i>May 21, Monday</i>.(--)Passed today some beautiful islands, among them the is­lands of Montroso and Quibo, the latter just one mountain standing alone in the ocean. It can be seen with the naked eye for forty miles. News again tonight that the coal is out.  Mesdames(--)(--), (--)(--), and (--)(--), have the fidgets, and keep the whole ship in an uproar with their scolding. The captain is burning up everything that can be spared.



<i>May 22, Tuesday</i>.(--)Passed four ships, two large and two small ones. Have been cutting the ship to pieces for fuel. Burned all the second deck, chicken coops, settees, and everything that could be turned into fuel, and still very uncertain about reaching the island of Taboga, as the wind and tide are very much against us. Have burned several thousand dollars' worth of good timber, yesterday and today.



<i>May 23, Wednesday</i>.(--)Last night, about ten o'clock, we dropped anchor about four miles from the island of Taboga. Directly afterward the awning caught on fire, and there was another cause of alarm for the ladies. It was soon extinguished, and no harm done. Early this morning Captain Forbes took a boat and went to the island for coal to take us in to Panama. Returned about two o’clock, when we got up steam and came into the port. Arrived about five o'clock and anchored very near the Oregon. George went on board of her and found John F. Hughs there. Wrote to John [her husband] and to Doctor Parker for George, and sent on board of her. About ten o'clock she put out for San Francisco. Everything looks very green and beautiful, particularly the islands in the bay.



<i>May 24, Thursday</i>.(--)About nine o'clock we bade adieu(--)forever, I hope (--)to the California. The tide was so low we had to walk a long way on the rough rocks. When we got to Mr. Farand's house we were very tired. Found the house very cool and pleasant, and he was very kind to us and tried to get us a house, but not succeeding we came to the American Hotel, where Mrs. Bawden, Mrs. Grimes, and I, got one room between us. Have had a great deal of company; most of the gentlemen passengers of the California have called. I found Mr. Coombs here.



<i>May 25, Friday</i>.(--)Have had company all day. Mr. Hobbs and Mr. Warren took supper with us. Mr. Larrentree brought us some tea from his stores and Mrs. Grimes made it.  Had a very cozy time.



<i>May 26, Saturday</i>.(--)Roused this morning very early, thinking the baggage was going off early, but it did not get off until nearly noon. Company all day again. Two English ladies, who are in distress, were here this evening with Captain Thomas ; seemed very agreeable and I pity them. The men who were to take us over to Cruces want to charge for three or four mules that did not go with the baggage at all, and as George will not submit to be humbugged, we have determined not to go until Monday. The people are firing thousands of fire­crackers to-night.  It almost deafens us.



<i>May 27, Sunday</i>(--)at home ! but it would puzzle a lawyer to find any Sabbath in Panama. Shops all open, all kinds of labor going on as usual, and in addition, a circus and cock-fight. Mr. St. Clair breakfasted with us, and he and his wife dined with us. Mr. Coombs brought me a large box of guava jelly. In the evening got all ready to start in the morning for Cruces.



<i>May 28,  Monday</i>.(--)Awakened this morning at three o'clock by our muleteer, who(--)as a great wonder for New Granadans(--)was  punctual  to  his  appointment.	But the men who are to carry me did not arrive until nearly six o'clock, at which time we set out ; Sue [her little daughter] on a native's back and I in a hammock between two men, with six others following to rest them. Formed  the advance guard, and kept ahead of most of the party until we got out	about	eight miles, when we all stopped on the bank of a stream and ate breakfast. Quite  a  picnic, and all seemed highly delighted so far; but they changed their minds soon after, for the roads were very bad. Mrs. Hoyer was thrown from her horse into the mud. My men gave out, and just at dark we met Turner on a fresh mule. I got on the mule man-fashion, (as it would have been very dangerous for me to have ridden over that road any other way,) one man leading the mule and one on each side of me, while George walked on behind. [This fashion, it is  recorded, had been set by the wife of Rev. O. C. Wheeler and a lady companion, while crossing the  Isthmus, with  the other Falcon passengers, in January.]	Thus we went on through the narrow mountain passes, in the dark and mud, [attended, as others' tragic experience abundantly proved, by imminent peril of murder and robbery,] and got to Cruces about eight o'clock. I saw Mr. Haws, the crazy man, about two miles from town, his mule fastened, and he lying on the ground.  Sue and Frank got in about half an hour after, and we went to bed very thankful that we were safe.



<i>May 29, Tuesday</i>.(--)The charge of the alcalde was twenty dollars for one miserable room and three naked cots for one night !  At  eight this  morning Mrs. Bawden, Mrs. Grimes, Mrs. Hoyer, Mr. Hobbs, George, and myself, started down the river in a whaleboat that Mr. Hobbs had engaged for us. We were nearly used up, but without meeting with any accident other than getting very wet(--)for it  rained, in torrents(--)and being frightened at two parties of tigers and panthers, we arrived safely, at	nine o'clock, at Chagres, and went on board the Orus, a miserable, dirty boat.



<i>May 30, Wednesday</i>.(--)This morning the Orus got up steam and went down to (--)(--)(--) Bay, where we dined.  But some of the passengers, being discontented, wanted to go on the English steamer [the Tay (?) of the Royal Mail line]. They would not give George any peace until he agreed to go with them. They gave the captain fifty dollars to put [us] on board the English steamer. Retired soon after tea, and about ten o'clock we got under way.



[The voyage was continued on the Tay(--)touching at Cartagena, "a magnificent but ruinous city "(--)to Kingston, Jamaica, at which port they arrived on June 4.

At Kingston, "the most lovely spot I ever saw," Mrs. McDougall with her brother-in-law and Mrs. Grimes, and Messrs. Warren, Hobbs, True, and Perry, took rooms at the suburban place of Mrs. Ferron, a creole lady, where they remained six days. Visits were made to the residence of Santa Ana(--)" rather plain in appearance, being a red brick house, large, but not fitted with the same taste that most of the residences are"(--)and to other points of interest.



On Sunday, June 10, the party sailed on the brig Ida, Captain Foulkes (?) commanding, for Philadelphia. On the fifteenth they were becalmed in a perilous passage among the Hog Stye reefs and	neighboring  islands and shoals. Much apprehension was felt.	On the next day mention is made in the diary of a "present of a book and a clean towel, from  Mrs. Warren, both very scarce articles."	The tedium of the voyage was relieved by music,(--)of voice and the accordion,(--)by rigging-climbing for wagers, and on two occasions by the mimicries of  Captain (--)(--), who masqueraded in the outer dress of a lady passenger.

The last page of the diary is quite illegible. The brig came safely to her destination, but on what date I am uninformed.

<i>W. H. McD.</i>
