A FEMALE CRUSOE.

A correspondent of the Newburyport Herald, tells the following tale:

SANTA BARBARA, CAL., Sept. 11, 1853.


We have now in Santa Barbara a great curiosity, it is an Indian woman who has lived for 18 years alone upon an island of San Nicholas, a small island about 45 miles from this place, during which time she has not seen the face of a human being. This island was once peopled by a tribe of Indians, to whome the North-West tribes were hostile. To preserve the remnant of this tribe from destruction, as well as with a view to christianize them the Padres, induced them to come to the main land 18 years ago. After thev were all on board the vessel sent for them, this woman swam ashore to look for her child, w hich had been left, and a storm springing up in the night, the vessel was compelled to put to sea, on returning she could not be found. She was known to be alive by those who at times visited the island for the purpose of hunting otters from the marks of fires and from footprints in the sand.

On being approached the other day she manifested much joy which she betrayed by signs of the most significant character, and at once commenced packing up her few articles of furniture. Whether the sounds that she uttered are words or not has not yet been ascertained. The man who found her is familiar with five or six Indian languages, but he was unanble to understand a single expression; it is more than probable that she has forgotten her native tongue altogether. Her clothing consists of skins of birds sewed together with the fibres of some tree or plant. Her food has been shell-fish, seals and a small bulbous root similar in appearance to an onion but wholly tasteless.

The needles with which she stitched her garments
are made of the sharp bones of a fish. She had two
hooks made of a bent nail sharpened by friction
upon a stone. Her lines were beautifully twisted
from the sinews of some animal probably a species
of fox which abounds on the island.

Her age as near as can be estimated is about 58
or 60. Her features are quite masculine and her
hair of the color of dark brown and very fine.
This is very remarkable for an Indian; their hair
vou know is alwavs jet black and coarse. In some
future letter I will give you a more extended account
of this marvel of the 19th century. She is 
truly an object for the reflection of the philosopher
and the inspection of the curious.

Yours, &., C.