SANTA BARBARA ISLANDS.

The six inhabited Santa Barbara islands off the coast of Southern California were equally divided between Indians of the Chumash and Shoshonean stocks. The three northern islands, San Miguel, Santa Rosa, and Santa Cruz, adjoining the coast of Santa Barbara and Ventura counties, were occupied, like this coast strip, by Chumash, whose family appellation, which is only a book name, is derived from the native term for Santa Rosa or its inhabitants. The three southern islands, Santa Catalina, San Clemente, and the outlying San Nicolas, were held by Shoshoneans.1 Santa Catalina was occupied by people speaking Gabrielino, and its name was Pimu. The Luiseno call the island Pipimar. The affiliations of the inhabitants of San Clemente are not certain. Reid includes the island, under the name Kinkipar, in his list of the principal rancherias of the Gabrielino "Indians of Los Angeles county." The present Gabrielino Indians call the island Kinki, the Luiseno call it Khesh; the latter state that it was inhabited by people speaking their own language, who, after having been brought to the mainland by the Franciscans, were settled at a place three miles below San Luis Rey Mission, to which they gave the same name, Khesh. That San Nicolas island was inhabited by Shoshoneans is evident from the four words preserved of the language of the last survivor, a woman who was alone on the island for eighteen years and died soon after being brought to the mainland half a century ago.2 These four words are: man, nache; sky, toygwah; hide, tocah; body, puoo-chay. Toygwah is certainly Shoshonean, as will be seen from a glance at the comparative vocabulary. The place of the San Nicolas island dialect in the general classification of the Shoshonean family cannot, however, be determined from this scanty material, especially as the spelling is English and there is no evidence that the four words are free from errors of typography or copying. It is not impossible that the dialect was fairly close to Gabrielino or Luisenos3, or, on the other hand, that it was much differentiated from all others.

1 The map in Powers' Tribes of California does not commit itself as to the three southern islands and leaves them uncolored. Powell, Ann. Rep. Bur. Ethn. VII, 67, states that they wore probably inhabited by people of Chumashan family; but the accompanying map colors them as Shoshonean.

2 History of Santa Barbara County, published by Thompson and West, Oakland, California, 1883.

3 The statement that Indians from Los Angeles and other places, and fathers familiar with all the dialects of the coast, could not understand a word of this woman's language, has the appearance of an overstatement. It must be remembered that she was brought to Santa Barbara, which iS in Chumash territory, and that there is no evidence that anyone conversant with Luiseno interviewed her.