A FEMALE CRUSOE.

STORY OF THE LOST WOMAN OF SAN NICOLAS.

She Returned for Her Child and Spent Twenty Years on the Island.

The recent earthquake and electrical disturbances at San Nicolas island, near Santa Barbara, has revived interest in the story of the old Indian woman who led a Crusoe life on the island for many years and who was finally removed to Santa Barbara only to die from the effects of unaccustomed civilization. The following sketch of the female Crusoe is from "Santa Barbara and Around There" by Edward Roberts:

On the smallest island was enacted the tragedy of the "Lost Woman of San Nicolas," which at Santa Barbara is a familiar tale. The story begins with the removal of a number of Indians from San Nicolas in 1836. Just as they were embarking one of the women discovered that her child had been left behind. Returning for it, she was abandoned by her companions, who were obliged by a coming storm to set sail for the mainland. It was intended to return so soon as the weather permitted, but years passed away and the woman in time was forgotten and left to her fate.

Twenty years later, a hunter named George Nidever of Santa Barbara, visited the island for otters. While there he determined to look for the woman. After careful search he found three huts made of whale-ribs and brush, and from where they stood extended an open plain, in the center of which Nidever saw the object of his journey. The woman's dress was made of skins and feathers, and her hair hung in tangled masses from her bare head. When discovered, she was cutting blubber from a seal which she had killed, but on seeing her visitor she received him with every manifestation of delight, and readily accompanied him to his boat. Signs were made for her to enter it, and on her doing so, Nidever sailed for the bay, and brought his charge to Santa Barbara.

Her arrival there created great excitement and hundreds called at Nidever's house to see her. Although she could not have been more than 50 years old, she was gray-haired and emaciated. Her expression was one of blank ignorance and her skin was dry and wrinkled. Her language, strange as it may seem, considering the comparatively short time she had been lost, was unintelligible to all. Those who considered themselves masters of every Indian tongue could not understand a word that she said. Owing to this fact the story of her hermitage was never known. What became of the child she returned from the boat to find on that fatal day in 1836 is a matter of pure conjecture. How long it lived and where it was buried were facts that could not be discovered. The woman appeared to have lost all human instincts, and, to every question asked made no answer that could be understood. In three months after her rescue she died and was buried by the Mission fathers.