The Hermit of San Nicholas

By W. A. Tenney

Illustrated from Photographs taken by J. C. Brewster

NOW fewreaders have ever seen in print any account of San Nicholas Island. The name even, is visible only on the recent maps of Cali fornia. The pioneer settlers of Yentura and Santa Barbara Counties, together with the survivors of the old Mexican race, relate an entertaining tradition of what occurred on this <i>terra incognita</i> at a modern date; but tradition, thongh a convenient foundation for a romance, is not recognized as credible history. Some of the pioneer hunters however, left in writing a thrilling narrative of what they personally witnessed on the island. This written account of thoroughly reliable eye-witnesses was published in the local history of Ventura County while the witnesses were still living. In addition to the uniform recital of a generntion not yet extinct, we have a corroborating report in public documents of what Government explorers found on San Nicholas at a recent date. The photographer, who accompanied the officials, has furnished us with the scenes taken by his camera. With this accumulation of disconnected material, accessible to very few readers, because long out of print, we venture to compile a connected story in every way historically true.

San Nicholas Island is eighty miles due south from Buena Ventura, and belongs to Ventura County. It is remote from all lines of ocean travel, situated in a storm center, with no sheltered harbor for large sea-going vessels, and with a roadstead unsafe for anchorage by reason of sudden and violent changes of winds. The pounding of the waves on the west side has opened a narrow gateway through the rock into a shallow bay, where small boats can comfortably land . The situntion of the island is such that it is difficult to find an experienced navigator who is willing to take tourists to the place, especially if expected to tarry for many days in the exposed offing.

For half a century this spot of earth has been unpeopled except for the last few years by a lone shepherd of a flock of sheep.

By Government survey the island is found to be nine miles long and four miles wide, with an area of thirty-two square miles. Some fourteen thousand acres are comparatively level, with a seemingly rich soil. A few stunted thorn bushes comprise the present timber, though excavations reveal the existence of an extinct forest. Indeed, the early fur hunters reported that more than fifty years ago they found a part of the tract covered with trees and shrubbery. Modern fires have denuded the whole territory.

Vast quantities of land shells are found in the sand and in mounds, but not a living specimen can now be found of that particular species, though they are still extant on other islands and the mainland. That these land mollusks were used for food by the primitive natives is self-evident from the segregated mounds of this species.

Numerous circular depressions are found everywhere, indicating the location of prehistoric human dwellings. Dr. Bowers, the scientific expert of the Government survey, counted forty of these depressions near the boat landing, like the basements of a compact village. The mounds of sea shells ofall existing species are immense.

One of the most beautiful varieties of the <i>haliotis</i> (abalone) family is numerous on the mounds, but so far as known it is now extinct on the whole California coast. These shell mounds are a matter of surprise to every beholder. It is doubtful if the world has an equal. They extend over the most of the island, one being about six miles long, a mile in width and twenty-five feet deep.

In some places beautifully polished pebbles are constructcd into pyramids of unique art. In the mounds of shells are interspersed bones of fowls, fish, seals and whales. Manifestly these artificial hills are composed of the refuse separated from the food of the extinct race. These silent remains bear unmistakable evidence of the numberS of people who here made their homes for probably thousands of years.

Wherever one turns his eye, broken mortars, pestles, bone implements and ingenious ornaments are seen.

What little has been published about San Nicholas has long been out of print, and is now inaccecssible to the reading public.

There are shadowy traditions that San Nicholas was densely populated by an interesting people when modern history began to draw upon their barbarian shores. The discovery was much later than that of the other islands in the Channel group. Exactly where and under whom the first civilized visitors landed on this isolated spot we have no record to inform us. It is known that the Russian fur-traders, not long before the landing of the California gold-seekers, learned that San Nicholas was one of the most prolific resorts for sea otter, and they took the earliest steps to bag the richest game. They accordingly shipped down a strong crew of experienced native Alaskan hunters, with all needed appliances and provisions, and the most improved rifles. The ship sailed away and left the imported northern savages to do their work until the end of the fur season. Tradition reports that the Kadiaks soon, by force of arms, made themselves criminally free with the wives and daughters of the natives. Of course the strongest elements in humanity rose in resistance; but what could an unwarlike people do with no weapons but stone fish spears and stone knives against a much smaller number with rifles and steel daggers?

There were no civilized spectators to the horrible massacre that followed. Later a report reached the mainland that the only survivors left were women and little girls; every male bad been slaughtered. Recent explorers find corroborating evidence of violence. Shallow graves where heaps of skeletons are found in disorder are not in accord with the regulation mode of sepulture where the single body was placed face downward with the feet drawn up beneath, and some personal belongings or ornaments were deposited with the remains.

One of an exploring party for the Smithsonian Institution states that many of the skulls of the exposed skeletons show a break in the temporal bone or in the eye socket, as if the owners had been killed by some blunt instrument. The remains confirm the report of a general violence.

Strange to relate, the most reliable printed report of the massacre first appeared in a Boston paper. At that early date the Yankees were partners with the Russians in the fur trade on the California coast. Here is the Boston item:

A ship owned by Boardman and Pope of Boston, commanded by Captain Whitemore, trading on the coast, took from the port of Sitka, Russian American, about thirty Kadiak Indians, a part of the hardy tribe inhabiting the Island of Kadiak, to the islands of the Santa Barbara Channel, for the purpose of killing sea otter, which were then very numerous. Captain Whitemore, after landing the Indians on these islands and placing in their hands firearms and other necssary implements of the chase, sailed away to the lower coast of California and South America. In the absence of the ship a dispute arose between the Kadiaks and the nativesof the islands, originating in the seizure of the females by the former. The Kadiaks possessing superior weapons, slaughtered the males without mercy, old and young. On the Island of San Nicholas not a male old or young was spared. At the end of the year Captain Whittemore returned to the islands, took the Kadiaks on board and returned to Sitka.(--)(History of Santa Barbara and Ventura Counties, page 255.)

Not long after the northern hunters left, tidings in some way reached the mainland of the painful situation on San Nicholas. Deep sympathy was awakened at the missions and elsewhere for the forlorn women and children. A purse was easily raised to charter a ship to bring the unfortunates to the mainland, where they could receive aid and sympathy.

It was in 1835 that Isaac Williams, once Collector of the Port of San Pedro, super intended a rescue party. The schooner <i>Peor es Nada</i>, Captain Hubbard, was chartered. While the schooner was anchored in the offing, the crew had little trouble or delay in "rounding up" the whole remainder of the race at the landing. As the last boatload was pushing out through the surf, one woman, noticing that something had been left, supposed to have been one of her children, leaped overboard and rushed up the bank in pursuit. The situation of the surf forbade any delay of the boat with its human cargo. The officer intended, when be had put his passengers on board the schooner, to return with the empty boat for the straggler, but on reaehing the ship, a rising gale admonished the captain that any delay would imperil the vessel and the lives of all on board; so he gave orders to weigh anchor and stand for San Pedro under close reef. It was a terrible head wind, and the vessel was buffeted for eight days before the coast could be reached. The captain intended, when the storm abated, to return for the one lost woman. On reaching San Pedro, however, he found an order from the owner of the ship at Monterey to sail at once for that port. There was no alternative left for his private plans. At Monterey a cargo of lumber was taken aboard for San Francisco. As she approached the Golden Gate a tempest was raging, and attempting to cross the bar the <i>Peor es Nada</i> capsized, and all on board perished. The hulk was seen no more. At that date this was the only vessel on the California coast sufficiently large to make a safe voyage to San Nicholas. 

It must be remembered that about the only traffic on the California coast less than seventy-five years ago was carried on by a few Eastern ships trading for hides and tallow.

The woman had nothing to fear from wild animals, for the largest was a native fox about the size of a small cat. There was no danger of starvation, for in addition to seals and fish, which she knew how to capture and manage, there was an inexhaustible stock of all kinds of mollusks only waiting to be picked up, and eggs by the millions deposited in the crannies of the rocks by pelicans, cormorants and pigeons.

The land, too, afforded esculent roots and native fruits. The old dwellings were left, and on the beach was landed an unlimited store of driftwood for a renewed cabin and fuel. Acquired skill in finding the material and the manufacture of clothing supplied that demand. A few domestic dogs left behind were glad to aid in the chase. What an amount of freedom there is in having all the world to yourself alone! Nobody to steal or cheat, to fight or scold. How broad the feeling when there is no mortal in your world that can possibly touch you or anything that you possess or want. Hermitage may have compensations.

The next report from the forlorn island was in 1850. This was fifteen years after the <i>Peor es Nada</i> made her last voyage. Meantime Mexico had ceded California to the United States, and a semi barbarism was fast giving place to an urbane civilization. Gold had been discovered and the Sierras were swarming with miners. Just fifteen years after the lone woman had been left on San Nicholas, Captain Nidever, a worthy citizen of Santa Barbara, ventured to make a voyage in search of otter. He was connected with the American Fur Company. As they were passing around the island to find the best point for game, Brown of the crew discovered in the wet sand the fresh tracks of a small human foot. He followed the trail from the beach until the tracks disappeared in the moss on the upland. He reported to the others, but the day was too far spent to continue the search. The next day the hunting trip was cut short by a rising gale. The captain was compelled to scud away for home. The next year Captain Nidever made a second voyage. While his men were moving around a different part of the island they came to some stakes of driftwood on which were hung strips of seal blubber to dry, out of the reach of wild dogs. Here was the work of human hands. Where to look for the invisible agent no one could tell. Again the party was here to hunt otter, not for a woman. The weather signals were dubious, and the business required haste. A fair catch of otter in those days was more lucrative than an average gold mine. Every moment of daylight must be economized. A violent storm soon drove the hunters to shelter. When they related on shore what they had discovered, the older residents and the dwellers about the missions said: "The lost woman must be still alive." A general interest was awakened in the involuntary hermit, and the Mission Fathers offered a prize of $200.00 to any party that would bring her to Santa Barbara.

It was in 1853 that Captain Nidever determined to take another cruise to San Nicholas, and engage in a woman hunt. The prize would pay to make one systematic sweep of the island. On landing be led his crew to one end of the island, where signs had before been seen, and marshalled them in line, as far apart as possible and yet maintain communication. Their united vision covered the whole breadth of territory. In time as they climbed the hill, Brown saw in the distant brush a dark object that seemed to move. At first he thought it was a bird, but as he niselessly drew near, it assumed the appearance of the back of a human bead. It was the woman in a low brush tent without a roof. She did not see Brown, but her attention was fixed upon tbe other men at a greater distance. He gave a signal by raising his hat up and down on the ramrod of his gun. A few dogs near the woman gave a warning growl, but at a fierce yell from her they disappeared. She was busy peeling the blubber from a seal skin with an iron hoop. Her mass of matted hair was of a yellowish brown color. Her dress was of cormorant skins (shags) cut in squares, extending from the shoulders to the ankles. There was no cover for head or feet. When all chance of escape was cut off, Brown stealthily moved around in front and let himself be seen. The woman made no attempt to flee, but on the contrary she received him with a bow and smile(--)with as much grace as he could have been welcomed in a civilized parlor. She greeted all hervisitors in the same way. True etiquette is not a mere formality in highly cultured circles, it is an innate instinct of untutored humanity. As the men sat down aronnd her she constantly talked, but not a word was intelligible. A few Indians of the crew spoke several dialects, but they understood not a word. She was the only one left who could speak the language of the island, and she knew no other.

The savage was endowed with the grace of hospitality. In a few minutes she took from a grass sack two varieties of roots, placing them in the smoldering ashes. When cooked she placed them before her guests; she gave the best and about all her larder contained. Taking a drinking dish, she went to a nearby spring and brought some water.

When the men made signs for her to go with them to the landing and the schooner, at first she failed to comprehend their meaning, but when they made signs for her to gather up her possessions, she caught the idea and began to pack her baskets and sacks with great dispatch. The dried blubber, and all else that could be used for food, was gathered up, meager clothing, bone needles, sinew and ornaments were packed. The men relieved her from the most of the luggage; and last of all the woman selected a glowing brand from the fire as an essential for warmth and cooking. It is much easier for Indians to transport fire than it is for them by any process they know to start it <i>de novo</i>.

When all was in readiness, she led the way down her trail, coming soon to a pure spring of drinking water, where seal blubber was hanging to dry; further down the grade she led to a fountain for bathing, where she paused to wash her hands and face. On reaching the landing, they motioned for her to enter the boat, which she cheerfully did. Aboard the schooner she sought a place near the cook store. When food was offered, she ate with great relish victuals such as she had never tasted before. Indeed, from that time on she preferred the bacon and bread to blubber and shell flsh. Brown at once found a piece of bed-ticking and set about making a skirt. This with a sailor's shirt and a discarded vest made her quite comfortable.

The weather signals indicated a prolonged season for hunting, so arrangements were made to camp on shore. Poles were leaned against a rock and an old sail spread over them for a tent. A short distance away a smaller shelter was arranged for the woman. She went about talking to herself and singing as if content and happy. She aided in the work, bringing wood and water. She then finished a water bucket which was unique. Into a nicely braided grass basket she placed some pieces of asphaltum, picked up on the beach; on these she placed hot stones, and when in a liquid state the asphaltum was carefully spread in a uniform thickness oYer the inside. When completed the basket was impervious to water as a tin pail and not much heavier. Small drinking dishes were made in the same way. In these vessels water could be bottled or food cooked by filling the basket with water and immersing a succession of hot rocks.

Among the otters that were brought into camp for skinning was one on the eve of parturition. The hunter removed the fetus, and stuffed lhe beautiful skin. By gestures the woman solicited the care of the toy. Taking it into her tent, she suspended it to a pole, and by the hour she would swing it back and forth, singing to it as to an infant. Eighteen years of hermit life had not abolished the maternal instinct.

She pressed it to her bosom and rocked it to and fro,

In memory of the little one she lost so long ago.

This time Captain Nidever was allowed a month of successful hunting, then the signs of sky and sea admonished him that it was time to leave. On the voyage homeward-bound, however, a fearful gale met him. The force of the wind, the boiling and breaking of the sea, the rolling and pitching of the creaking vessel seemed fearful to one not accustomed to ocean life. The great anxiety of the woman seemed to increase until she fell upon her knees on deck, raising her bands and open eyes to the heavens, as if invoking aid from an unseen power above. The dramatic scene was short. Soon the smiling face of the sun appeared from beneath the retreating clouds, the gale was abated and the seas assuaged. Then the woman in pantomime conveyed to Captain Nidever the view that it was her intercession with the unseen which mitigated the tempest.

When the crew with the hermit were landing, the first object of interest to attract her attention was a two-wheeled cart drawn by a yoke of oxen. She had never seen before any domestic animal except the small Indian dogs. She made apt gestures of her surprise at the yoke, the docile oxen, the revolving wheels, at the same time talking and laughing. Soon a horseman came riding down the beach. This seemed still more strange and ludicrous to her. Placing two fingers of her right hand astride of her left thumb, she gesticulated the galloping rider with shouts of laughter. She was in a new world, though less than a hundred miles from where she had spent her whole life. Every view awakened surprise and hilarity.

Captain Nidever took the hermit to his own home and placed her in eare of his efficient wife. The Mission Fathers, too, assumed an indirect supervision over the new arrival. Visitors from near and far came to see the human curiosity, and many donations were left for her comfort. She seemed willing to attire herself for exhibition in her suit of birdskins with feather points downward. She had a keen relish for all the varieties of the white man's food, and was extremely fond of fruit. From lack of critical oversight she ate to excess and brought on a serious malady. It was supposed that a return to her native diet would furnish a remedy, but she spurned clams, fish and seal blubbers. In a few weeks the sickness proved fatal, and the last remnant of a once numerous race passed away without being able by words to communicate anything about her people. The tale of personal sorrow and suffering for eighteen years, and the tradition of the extinct race must always remain a blank to the civilized world. At the end of the hermit's life she was given an appreciative burial by the Fathers. The two unique dresses, one worn by herself and a little one supposed to belong to a deceased child, together with a basket of spear heads, abalone fishhooks, bone needles, sinew-thread and miscellaneous ornaments were packed up by the Fathers and sent to Rome. They were deposited in the cabinet of curiosities in the Vatican, where, doubtless, visitors may still inspect them. A carefully prepared account of the hermit went with her effects to the Vatican.

And what can now be said about the modern San Nicholas? The island is still there, but for half a century it has virtually been unpopulated. The otters were soon exterminated, so hunters had no motive to visit the storm-lashed isle. There are some twenty thousand acres of manifestly rich soil, but no homesteaders care to take it. Food and water are abundant. Some adventurer has placed on the island a large flock of sheep. Periodically the sheep-shearers make a voyage to ply their vocation for a week or two, and at intervals a nomadic shepherd makes a tour to look after the lambs. The larger part of the year, however, San Nicholas entertains no man. The bleating of the sheep, the cry of the lambs, the barking of the inoffensive foxes, the scream of sea fowls chime in with hoarse growl of sea lions. The roar of the billows among the cliffs and the muffled tones of the ever-beating surf. Nature's desolation reigns supreme.





Coral Harbor, the Only Entrance. It Is Very Shallow.

A Part of the Stone Forest of San Nicholas.

One of the Immense Mounds of Abalone Shells (Haliotis).

The Mode of Burial, the Face Down and the Feet Drawn Up Behind the Body.

A Vast Mound of Small Shells and a Few of the Exposed Skeletons.