Island woman's origins still hotly debated

Alaska theory, despite support, angers experts, traditionalists

By Barney Brantingham

News-Press Staff Writer

What would you think if the storied Lone Woman of San Nicolas Island turned out to have been an Alaskan, not a local Indian?

Ho, hum?

Or anger at anyone having the nerve to challenge one of our most cherished legends?

Maria Daily, chronicler of the Channel Islands, felt the savage whip of scientists a few years ago.

That's because she ventured to suggest in an article in "California's History" that the Alaskan scenario should be explored.

After she presented a paper to archeologists meeting at the Museum of Natural History a few years ago, she got letters slamming her ideas as absurd.

"People were upset. I got a bunch of letters that this was an absurd hypothesis," she said.

"People don't want their bubbles to be burst.

"I'm not saying she is or she isn't" Alaskan, Daily said, just that the question needs to be examined.

After my recent Santa Barbara Yesterdays column, Los Olivos history buff Jim Norris also questioned the origin of "Juana Maria."

That was what Santa Barbara Mission padres named the woman after she was rescued in 1853 after an 18-year solitary sojourn on the bleak island.

She was accidentally left behind when all other Indians were evacuated from San Nicolas in about 1835. "No one says 'Juana Maria' was Chumash except a Harrington interviewee many years after the event." Norris said John P. Harrington was a noted local researcher into Chumash culture.

"I would suggest she was Alaskan Indian left with otter hunters around 1805-20," Norris said.

Norris and Michael Redmon, librarian at the Santa Barbara Historical Society Museum, also questioned the authenticity of a commonly used photo of "Juana Maria," which appeared with my column.

Redmon said Southern California historians had raised questions about it. The woman pictured appears well-fed despite her many years subsisting on island fare, and younger than someone described as middle-aged.

Norris is suspicious of it. "Do we have any other Santa Barbara photos from 1853?" he asked.

The woman died seven weeks after her rescue, apparently as a reaction to rich foods she was offered.

In her paper, Daily, of the Santa Cruz Island Foundation, raises some key points. First of all, residents of San Nicolas, one of the four southernmost channel islands, were Gabrielino Indians. Those of the four northern ones were Chumash, she said.

After being brought to Santa Barbara, the woman chattered on in a language no local Indian could understand, according to accounts.

Emma Hardacre, a Santa Barbaran who studied the Lone Woman legend years after Juana Maria's death, doubted that she was an island Indian, according to Daily. She behaved like a woman "who had knowledge of the amenities of life," Hardacre said, not like someone raised on a barren island.

Then there were the dogs. When otter hunters George Nidever and Charley Brown, a German whose real name was Carl Dittman, rescued Juana Maria, they found wild dogs on San Nicolas.

"They were about the size and form of a coyote, of a black and white color," Nidever said. "I have seen the same kind of dogs among the Northwest Indians."

Nidever went back to shoot the dogs so he could run sheep there. His son later reported that Nidever told him they were "of the Alaskan breed."

"Indians from the north, particularly peoples from Kodiak Island and the Aleutian Islands, participated in the California sea otter trade on and around San Nicolas during the first part of the 19th century," Daily said.

Juana Maria's story was fictionalized in the 1961 book by Scott O'Dell, "Island of the Blue Dolphins."