The Female Robinson Crusoe.—Ladies' Fair.

Some time ago, we published an We were unable to find this, with any verification. Obviously, if we find it, it should be placed here. interesting account of an Indian woman who had led a solitary life on the Island of San Nicholas for the space of eighteen years, and who wa[s] accidentally found there by George Niedever, of Santa Barbara, in an otter hunting excursion. This gentleman drought [brought] her away, and she lived in his family about six weeks, during which time she was an object of the greatest interest to the inhabitants of Santa Barbara and the surrounding country. On the 18th. ult., we regret to say that the old woman died, and the world will consequently never know anything more of her strange history. She died of severe dysentery, brought on, it is said, by eating fruit and water-melons, and probably by the total change in her habits of life. She was very docile and quick of comprehension, and had made a considerable progress in learning the Spanish Language, under the tuition [tutoring] of the amiable and indulgent wife of Mr. Niedever, who taught her the Lord's Prayer, the Hail Mary and the Creed, and explained to her the fundamental tenets of Christianity. A little before her death, she expressed a desire to be baptized, and the Sacrament was administered to her by the Rev. John Sanchez, one of the learned and venerable Franciscan Fathers attached to the Mission of Santa Barbara; and very soon afterwards, her spirit sped away to "Where the wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest.["] Her chances for Heaven, we trust, are not much diminished in consequence of her voluntary and protracted solitude.

We understand that her robe, made of upwards of fifty [bird]-skins sewed together with whale sinews, with her knife made of an iron hoop, and needles, and several other articles of her manufactured work, will be exhibiited at the Ladies' Fair, to be held in the Musical Hall, on Tuesday next, in aid of the funds for the erection of St. Mary's Church. These articles, apart from the other interesting fabrics of female workmanship which are to be exhibited, will doubtless attract crowds of the curious and scientific, and they will well repay inspection.