The Lone Indian of San Nicolas.

The November number of Hutchings' California Magazine contains a narrative of an Indian woman brought from the barren and solitary island of San Nicolas to the city by Mr. George Nidever, three years ago. All that was known of this remarkable woman, and all of her history while living on this island, she was able to impart by signs and gestures, (she had lost the knowledge of language), and the manner of her discovery and deliverance, her arrival here and death that soon followed, has before been published. While living she was an object of lively interest to some and curiosity to others.

Speaking with a friend lately, an old and respectable resident of California, on this and kindred topics, we were enabled to trace the history of the Indians inhabiting this and other islands in our channel back to the year 1811. The account given of the war of extermination* against the Indians on this particular island is not uninteresting, and runs thus:

In the year 1811, a ship† owned by Boardman &amp; Pope, of Boston, commanded by Captain Whittemore, trading, on this coast, took from the port of Sitka, Russian America, about thirty Kodiak Indians, a part of a hardy tribe inhabiting the island of Kodiak, to the islands in the Santa Barbara Channel, for the purpose of killing sea otter, which were then very numerous in the neighborhood of these islands. Captain Whittemore, after landing the Kodiaks on the island, and placing in their hands fire arms and the necessary implements of the chase, sailed away to the coast of Lower California and South America.

In the absence of the ship a dispute arose between the Kodiaks and the natives of the islands, originating in the seizure of the females by the Kodiaks. The Kodiaks, possessing more activity, endurance and knowledge of war, and possessing superior weapons, slaughtered the males without mercy, old and young. On the island of San Nicolas not a male, old or young, was spared. At the end of a year Captain Whittemore returned to the islands, took the Kodiaks on board, and carried them back to Sitka.

From this period little is known of the Indians remaining on these islands till the year 1836, when Captain Isaac Williams, late Collector of the Port San Pedro, visited this island in a small vessel, and took on board all the Indians remaining but one woman, who was left in the manner stated by Captain Russel [Russell] in the California Magazine. The Indians of the islands were of the type of the coast Indians, and were no doubt a part of them.

* The war referred to by Capt. Russel [Russel] in the Cal. Mag of Nov.

† The ship was captured the following year near the Sandwich Islands, and by the British ship-of-war "Phśbe," and Captain Whittemore was carried a prisoner of war to England&#8212;ED.