PACIFIC COAST ITEMS.

More fine marble has been found in Utah.

A steam flour mill is talked of in Fall Brook, San Diego county [sic].

Squirrel poison killed a number of horses for a Stanislaus farmer the other day.

Some Vallejo gentlemen are about to send a man to Alaska to locate mines.

Grant county [sic], New Mexico, offers $100 per head for scalps of hostile Apaches.

The <emph>Calistogian</emph> figures the wine product of Napa county [sic] to be 2,910,750 gallons.

There are at present twenty-two buildings in Astoria, Or., in course of erection.

A large number of beaver and other fur-bearing animals have recently been trapped in Jackson county [sic], Oregon.

The staff of surveyors from San Bernardino on the Southern California Railroad are in the canyon, heading toward Temecula.

Forty-seven men and women, new arrivals from Switzerland, came to Sonoma valley [sic] last Wednesday to permanently locate there.

Stone coal is now the main excitement in the region of Ten-Mile and Looking-Glass, Douglas county [sic], Oregon. The impression is that the coal exists under most of the hills of that region.

Near Canyonville, Douglas county [sic], Or., a 12-year-old boy was hunting and met two panthers. He wounded one, and was attacked by the animal. Help arrived and both panthers were killed.

After the late flood, farmers along Bear creek [sic], Jackson county [sic], Oregon, were busy gathering up rails that had lodged in the willows. The rule is that all rails that are washed on a man's land are considered to be his property.

The annual report of P. Evarts, the Superintendent of the Eureka and Palisade Railroad, shows that during the year 1880 the net profit was $248,232 94. The same official reports of the Ruby Hill Railroad that its net profit was $80,741 18.

The work of preparing the old broom factory at South Vallejo for a fish cannery is progressing. About $30,000 will be represented in the enterprise. About seventy hands will be employed, and the canning capacity will be 200 cases daily. Canning will begin in about a month.

Hancock is the name bestowed on the new town in the copper district in Mason Valley, Esmeralda county [sic], Nev. The name was given last fall during the campaign, when it was said it could produce more fights to the quart of whisky than any town of its size in the State [sic].

In the Art Loan Exhibition at Santa Barbara there is a bone needle, a memento of the Indian woman of San Nicholas Island, who was rescued by Captain Nidever. When the tribe was removed to the mainland, by accident this woman was left behind, and for a long term of years she lived alone on the island.

At Santa Fe, New Mexico, the other day, a new railroad company known as the Jemez Valley Hot Springs Railroad Company, was organized. This is the first company of the kind ever organized by citizens of the Territory. The road will run from Bernalillo to the famous Jemez Hot Springs, a distance of about thirty miles.

A number of citizens of Leadville, Co., have asked that the saloons, gaming houses, theaters and bagnios be closed on Sunday. The City Attorney was instructed to draw up an ordinance to that effect, including also the business houses. The Merchants' Protective Association have called a meeting to protest.

At Clark Ranch, near Leadville, Col., a miner named Gavin was recently, while in his cabin, buried under a snow-slide. The fire was out, and soon he was in darkness. He must escape, so he began to dig a tunnel. He worked till his hands were benumbed and frozen. He worked thus for six days and escaped, but is not expected to live.

The principal losses of cattle in Wyoming, Colorado and Nebraska have been on the Laramie plains and along the line of the railroad toward the east and on the south, and the severest have been on the ranges between the North and South Platte rivers, east of Julesburg. In the sections mentioned 10 to 15 per cent. [sic] of the cattle have died, and in some Colorado herds the loss has gone as high as 50 per cent.