<hi rend="bold>DAVID</hi>

AN ADVENTURE WITH MEMORY AND WORDS

By Scott O'Dell

<hi rend="bold">B</hi>ECAUSE CHILDREN'S LITERATURE is a large and amorphous subject, I would like to walk around it&#8212;perhaps "stroll" is a better word&#8212;on the theory that one may measure a circle by beginning anywhere.

The Prince of Granada, an heir to the Spanish crown, was arrested and tried by the Royal Audiencia, for fear that he might aspire to the throne.

He was sentenced to solitary confinement for life in Madrid's old and infamous prison, the Place of Skulls, known for the bones of those who once had dwelt there, for its dripping water and assorted vermin.

He was given one book to read, the Bible.

The Prince of Granada read the Bible, apparently hundreds of times, for when he died after thirty-three years in the Place of Skulls, his jailers found that he had covered the walls of his prison, using nails upon the soft, yellow stone, with a series of bizarre notation.

What were these notations that a man, during a lifetime of reading the Bible, in hours of loneliness, terror, fear, and boredom, scratched upon the walls of his cell? Were they reflections inspired by the greatest book known to Western man? Were they messages left to those unfortunates who were yet to live out their lives in the same Place of Skulls, messages culled from the hope and wisdom of the Bible?

No, here are some of the notations his jailers found:

The eighth verse of the ninety-seventh psalm is the middle verse of the Bible.

Ezra 7, 21 contains all the letters of the alphabet except the letter J.

Each verse of the one hundred thirty-sixth psalm ends alike.

The ninth verse of the eighth chapter of Esther is the longest.

The thirty-fifth verse of the eleventh chapter of St. John is the shortest.

The word "girl" occurs but once in the Bible. The word "Jehovah" six thousand, eight hundred and fifty-five times. "The Lord," one thousand, eight hundred and fifty-three times.

No word or name of more than six syllables can be found in the Bible.

There are in both books of the Bible 3,538,483 letters.

The Prince of Granada was a man of some education. He could read and write and, most certainly, count. It is reasonable to assume, from his flare for figures, his patience and industry, that if he had lived today he would have made a good engineer. Yet he would have remained, if we may judge from the record he left us, a man without humanity or a curiosity beyond the trivial.

<hi rend="bold">S</hi>ome years ago, in collaboration with Bill Doyle, I wrote the story of his twenty-two years passed in Folsom Prison. A true story he told me is this:

During the last five years of his sentence, Doyle was the King of Folsom, with more real authority over its 6,500 men than that of the warden. He knew every inmate by name, and one was Ted Hicks.

Hicks was a docile young man, a grammar-school drop-out, who had never read a book except under duress. In Folsom, with time on his hands and no corner drugstore to hang around, he became a voracious reader of pulp magazines, somehow smuggled to him.

A year or so after his imprisonment, with some provocation Hicks killed a cell mate and was sent to death row, pending the outcome of his trial. A twenty-four-hour guard was placed on his cell, but he still managed to get his pulp stories from outside.

When he wasn't reading or dreaming of what he had read, Hicks was training a mouse, which he carried in the breast pocket of his jumper, teaching the mouse tricks that usually only a dog can do.

One night he asked the guard for a needle and thread to repair a hole in his sleeve. When the needle was passed to him through the wicket, Hicks repaired his sleeve. He also spent the next week or so teaching the mouse to find and fetch the needle, which he would hide in various parts of his cell.

He then returned the needle to the guard and soon afterwards sent the mouse out through the wicket to retrieve it. With this needle, working at night for more than a month, using this makeshift tool against the softer steel of his cell, biting deeper and deeper into the metal, until his fingers literally ground to the bone, he at last cut a hole.

One evening at mess time just as the guard was being changed, Hicks crawled through this hole. He was not seeking freedom. He was not trying to show off. He was simply acting out in detail a plan presented to him by a story he had read.

From the cell, Hicks made his way to the mess hall. There, still acting out the role he had devised for himself, he confronted a waiter who was carrying a tray of bread, snatched a knife from the tray, and slashed the waiter's throat.

The lives of the Prince of Granada and the prisoner of Folsom are suggestive. The Prince read the Bible hundreds of times and after a lifetime of reading left only a list of figures to mark his knowledge. The prisoner sedulously burrowed into a mountain of printed trash and emerged on the other side with a novel method of escape and murder. The lives of these two men underscore a fact: reading is not automatically a maker of men and women, of mature citizens who are responsive to each other and to aspirations of humanity.

<hi rend="bold">B</hi>ut reading <emph>is</emph> important. It is especially important to children. It is the key which unlocks the gates of formal education, the means by which the wisdom of the past and the technology of the present are made available. But it can do much more. Through reading, a child may live another's life for a few hours. He becomes Huck Finn and wrestles with the problem of laws that destroy freedom; or he is Johnny Tremain and learns in the time of the American Revolution how adversity may be put to good use; or he is even the Indian girl, Karana, who must live her life alone on a barren Pacific island. By learning to identify with others, to suffer or to rejoice as he encounters tragedy or joy, he can develop a sense of empathy towards the life around him&#8212;his fellow companions as well as the creatures of the world he inhabits.

The books children choose to read, the books authors choose to write for them, and why they are written, have been discussed at length by librarians, teachers, parents, psychologists, and even children. But little has been heard, whether from modesty, indifference, or discretion, from the author himself. For this reason, as a writer of books that children read, it should not be repetitive for me to make a few personal observations.

Books of mine, which are classified officially as books for children, were not written <emph>for</emph> children. Instead, and in a very real sense, they were written for myself. There is about all of them, however, one distinction which I feel is important to this form of literature: they were written consistently in the emotional area that children share with adults.

This area is much wider and much deeper than commonly it is supposed to be. Not that children are pocket editions of adults in the matter of feeling; nor do they react to the same stimuli as their elders. But they do have their own frustrations and hopes, a sense of the mystery that surrounds life, and a curiosity about it. 

I believe that the child looks at the world with a sense of wonder. He wishes to know how it was fashioned and by whom. He wants to know what it is to be good and truthful and fair, kind and courageous. Above all, he has the ability, which in adults either is eroded or entirely lost, to identify himself with the characters of a story.

Writing books for oneself, which hopefully children will read, has at least two motivations. It is an effort to placate whatever ghosts may persist, to make in the words of Sigmund Freud a "poetical confession." It also is an attempt, conscious or not, to work out through a form of self-analysis a needed and desired personal development.

<emph>Island of the Blue Dolphins</emph> began in anger, anger at the hunters who invade the mountains where I live and who slaughter everything that creeps or walks or flies. This anger also was directed at myself, at the young man of many years ago, who thoughtlessly committed the same crimes against nature.

Thinking of him, I remembered certain mornings of my childhood when with other boys of my age I went wandering into the hills of Palos Verdes. There we turned over every likely stone, searching for small monsters. We thrust our hands down every squirrel and coyote hole in our path. Commonly we found an owl. This was the prize of all prizes! It was twice the size of one's fist, soft-feathered, with great yellow eyes that blinked in the sudden sun.

What did we do with this creature of the nocturnal air?  We killed it, of course. We wrung its neck. We cut off its legs, for the exposed tendons of an owl's legs, when pulled in a careful way, made the tiny claws open and close in a ghastly simulation of life.

I remember these depredations with horror. This horror, muted but nonetheless real, colors the latter part of the book and the latter part only, because my Indian girl began her life, as most children do, in the closed world of selfishness where everything&#8212;whether clothed in fur or feathers&#8212;was an object of indifferent cruelty.

Through her I wished to say to the young and to all who wish to listen that we have a chance to come into a new relationship to the things around us. Once, in Defoe's day, we were cunning, manipulative children, living in a palace of nature. In her brief lifetime, she made the change from that world, where everything lived only to be exploited, into a humane and meaningful world.

Down corridors of memory I also saw Jack Iman. Freckled, with black eyes alert under a bang of black hair, a Hercules in miniature. Jack hated me the moment we met and for no other reason except that I was a city boy, lately come to his town. I likewise hated him and for no other reason except that he hated me.

In all weathers, during the school week and even on Sunday, Jack pursued me&#8212;on the school grounds with his taunts, off the grounds with his fists. He was my nemesis, my tormentor, the embodiment to me of every evil.

Years later I read in a newspaper that Jack Iman had become a prizefighter. One evening I went to see him fight. I went to see him beaten, but the same Jack Iman whom I remembered, only with vaster muscles, was the victor. I went again and again to watch him fight, each time hoping for his defeat and humiliation. At last, after a year of fighting, Jack Iman was knocked out and was carried from the ring. To my surprise, sitting there at ringside, somehow I felt diminished.

I was pleased nonetheless and went back to the dressing room to introduce myself, and to quietly gloat at his misfortune, for I was sure he would not remember me. Though he was returning slowly from another world, though fifteen years had passed since we had seen each other, Jack recognized me at once. Unsteadily he came towards me, put an arm around my shoulder, and quietly wept.

This, to, in spirit I have used in <emph>Island of the Blue Dolphins</emph>. It lies at the heart of the encounter between the girl and her enemy, the wild dog, for I believe and wished to say, with whatever power I might summon to the task, that we must forgive our enemies. Further, I believe that the hopes of civilization itself, obscure as they are, cannot be realized without this act of identification.

With the publication of a book for adults, an author usually hears from most of his friends and none of his enemies. Afterwards there is silence. But with the children, if they like your book, the reverse is true. They respond in numbers, by the thousands of letters, over an indefinite period of time. It is this response and concern that to me make the work of an author worth the doing.

There are, of course, a few letters that you wish you had not received&#8212;the one from the boy in Minnesota, for example. Asked to write as a class assignment, to the author of a book he recently had read, this youngster penned a long and dutiful letter, full of self-conscious compliments, and ended out-of-breath with this rather startling remark: "Goodbye for now, you old jerk."

And yet, of all the audiences, children are the finest!

Reprint

ISLAND OF THE BLUE DOLPHINS

<hi rend="bold">T</hi>here had been wild dogs on the Island of the Blue Dolphins as long as I remember, but after the Aleuts had slain most of the men of our tribe and their dogs had left to join the others, the pack became much bolder. It spent the nights running through the village and during the day was never far off. It was then that we made plans to get rid of them, but the ship came and everyone left Ghalas-at.

I am sure that the pack grew bolder because of their leader, the big one with the thick fur around his neck and the yellow eyes.

I had never seen this dogs before the Aleuts came and no one else had, so he must have come with them and been left behind when they sailed away. He was a much larger dog than any of ours, which besides have short hair and brown eyes. I was sure that he was an Aleut dog.

Already I had killed four of the pack, but there were many left, more than in the beginning, for some had been born in the meantime. The young dogs were even wilder than the old ones.

I first went to the hill near the cave when the pack was away and collected armloads of brush which I place near the mouth of their lair. Then I waited until the pack was in the cave. It went there early in the morning to sleep after it had spent the night prowling. I took with me the big bow and five arrows and two of the spears. I went quietly, circling around the mouth of the cave and came up to it from the side. There I left all of my weapons except one spear.

I set fire to the brush and pushed it into the cave. If the wild dogs heard me, there was no sound from them. Nearby was a ledge of rock which I climbed, taking my weapons with me.

The fire burned high. Some of the smoke trailed out over the hill, but much of it stayed in the cave. Soon the pack would have to leave. I did not hope to kill more than five of them because I had only that many arrows, but if the leader was one of the five I would be satisfied. It might be easier if I waited and saved all my arrows for him, and this I decided to do.

None of the dogs appeared before the fire died. Then three ran out and away. Seven more followed and a long time afterwards a like number. There were many more still left in the cave.

The leader came next. Unlike the others, he did not run away. He jumped over the ashes and stood at the mouth of the cave, sniffing the air. I was so close to him that I could see his nose quivering, but he did not see me until I raised my bow. Fortunately I did not frighten him.

He stood facing me, his front legs spread as if he were ready to spring, his yellow eyes narrowed to slits. The arrow struck him in the chest. He turned away from me, took one step and fell. I sent another arrow toward him which went wide.

At the time three more dogs trotted out of the cave. I used the last of my arrows and killed two of them.

Carrying both of the spears, I climbed down from the ledge and went through the brush to the place where the leader had fallen. He was not there. While I had been shooting at the other dogs, he had gone. He could not have gone far because of his wound, but though I looked everywhere, around the ledge where I had been standing and in front of the cave, I did not find him.

I waited for a long time and then went inside the cave. It was deep, but I could see clearly.

Far back in a corner was the half-eaten carcass of a fox. Beside it was a black dog with four gray pups. One of the pups came slowly toward me, a round ball of fur that I could have held in my hand. I wanted to hold it, but the mother leaped to her feet and bared her teeth. I raised my spear as I backed out of the cave, yet I did not use it. The wounded leader was not there.

Night was coming and I left the cave, going along the foot of the hill that led to the cliff. I had not gone far on this trail that the wild dogs used when I saw the broken shaft of an arrow. It had been gnawed off near the tip and I knew it was from the arrow which has wounded the leader.

Farther on I saw his tracks in the dust. They were uneven as if he were traveling slowly. I followed them toward the cliff, but finally lost them in the darkness.

The next day and the next it rained and I did not go to look for him. I spent those days making more arrows, and on the third day, with these arrows and my spear, I went out along the trail the wild dogs had made to and from my house.

There were no tracks after the rain, but I followed the trail to the pile of rocks where I had seen them before. On the far side of the rocks I found the big gray dog. He had the broken arrow in his chest and he was lying with one of his legs under him.

He was about ten paces from me so I could see him clearly. I was sure that he was dead, but I lifted the spear and took good aim at him. Just as I was about to throw the spear, he raised his head a little from the earth and then let it drop.

This surprised me greatly and I stood there for a while not knowing what to do, whether to use the spear or my bow. I was used to animals playing dead until they suddenly turned on you or ran away.

The spear was the better of the two weapons at this distance, but I could not use it as well as the other, so I climbed onto the rocks where I could see him if he ran. I placed my feet carefully. I had a second arrow ready and pulled back the string, aiming at his head.

Why I did not send the arrow I cannot say. I stood on the rock with the bow pulled back and my hand would not let go. The big dog lay there and did not move and this may be the reason. If he had gotten up I would have killed him. I stood there for a long time looking down at him and then I climbed off the rocks.

He did not move when I went up to him, nor could I see him breathing until I was very close. The head of the arrow was in his chest and the broken shaft was covered in blood. The thick fur around his neck was matted from the rain.

I do not think that he knew I was picking him up, for his body was limp, as if he were dead. He was very heavy and the only way I could lift him was by kneeling and putting his legs around my shoulders.

In this manner, stopping to rest when I was tired, I carried him to the headland.

I could not get through the opening under the fence, so I cut the bindings and lifted out two of the whale ribs and thus took him into the house. He did not look at me or raise his head when I laid him on the floor, but his mouth was open and he was breathing.

The arrow had a small point, which was fortunate, and came out easily though it had gone deep. He did not move while I did this, nor afterwards as I cleaned the would with a peeled stick from a coral bush. This bush has poisonous berries, yet its wood often heals wounds that nothing else will.

I had not gathered food for many days and the baskets were empty, so I left water for the dog, and after mending the fence, went down to the sea. I had no thought that he would live and I did not care.

All day I was among the rocks gathering shellfish and only once did I think of the wounded dog, my enemy, lying there in the house, and then to wonder why I had not killed him.

He was still alive when I got back, though he had not moved from the place where I had left him. Again I cleaned the wound with a coral twig. I then lifted his head and put water in his mouth, which he swallowed. This was the first time that he had looked at me since the time I had found him on the trail. His eyes were sunken and they looked out at me from far back in his head.

Before I went to sleep I gave him more water. In the morning I left food for him when I went down to the sea, and when I came home he had eaten it. He was lying in the corner, watching me. While I made a fire and cooked my supper, he watched me. His yellow eyes followed me wherever I moved.

That night I slept on the rock, for I was afraid of him, and at dawn as I went out I left the hole under the fence open so he could go. But he was there when I got back, lying in the sun with his head on his paws. I had speared two fish, which I cooked for my supper. Since he was very thin, I gave him one of them, and after he had eaten it he came over and lay down by the fire, watching me with his yellow eyes that were very narrow and slanted up at the corners.

Four nights I slept on the rock, and every morning I left the hole under the fence open so he could leave. Each day I speared a fish for him and when I got home he was always at the fence waiting for it. He would not take the fish from me so I had to put it on the ground. Once I held my hand out to him, but at this he backed away and showed his teeth.

On the fourth day when I came back from the rocks early he was not there at the fence waiting. A strange feeling came over me. Always before when I returned, I had hoped that he would be gone. But now as I crawled under the fence I did not feel the same.

I called out, "Dog, Dog," for I had no other name for him.

I ran toward the house, calling it. He was inside. He was just getting to his feet, stretching himself and yawning. He looked first at the fish I carried and then at me and moved his tail.

That night I stayed in the house. Before I fell asleep I thought of a name for him, for I could not call him Dog. The name I thought of was Rontu, which means in our language Fox Eyes.

[...]

<hi rend="bold">DAVID</hi>

THE BLACK PEARL. S. O'Dell. Houghton Mifflin, 1967.

THE ISLAND OF THE BLUE DOLPHINS. S. O'Dell. Houghton Mifflin, 1960.

THE KING'S FIFTH. S. O'Dell. Houghton Mifflin, 1966.

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF CHILDREN'S ART. R. Kellogg, S. O'Dell, CRM, Inc., 1967.