SOME REMAINS OF A FORMER PEOPLE.

THE group of islands off our southern coast, of which San Miguel is the northernmost and San Clemente the farthest south, are reported by our oldest navigators as having been inhabited. In fact, Cabrillo, who discovered California and some of the islands in 1542, makes the statement that he found them thickly populated by an ingenious people.  Some collections of the remains of a former race have been found on these islands at different times, and have reached the rooms of the Smithsonian Institution. Another quite large collection, made by myself on the adjacent main-land, was sent on; also, facts and conclusions reported, which induced Professor Spencer F. Baird to arrange an archc(ae)ological exploring expedition to these islands, which commenced operations in May of this year under my direction, and lasted nearly three months. On our way down, our party was accommodated by the revenue cutter <i>Rush</i>, Captain Baker, then on her southern cruise, which gave us easy access to San Miguel Island.

This island is a barren lump of sand, rising boldly from the sparkling ocean as we go south, and facing the sun in its descent from the meridian.	There are some brown hills on the island(--)one forming the main ridge and the highest; but their dry and dusty appearance impresses the traveler with a dreariness not more comforting than the many light dunes and sandy slopes, over which the north-west winds whirl the sand in fog衍ike clouds that strike the practical eye with awe while roaming over these shifting hills.	Cuyler Harbor, which makes in on the eastern side of the island, offers good shelter in north-west winds, and is well protected against a southwester by a reef stretching from  the shore to the islet which lies in the entrance of the small harbor, leaving the main channel on its northeastern side. High dunes rise from the bay at an angle of forty-five degrees, formed actually by the weight of the shifting sand, which rolls down the incline as if liquid. On landing, we found it necessary to wade through a mass of this steep loose sand to at least a height of eighty feet, where alone we could find a base on the top of a shell-heap to erect the tents for our small party.

We found large shell deposits all over the island, especially on the rocky northern end, about a mile from the harbor, near a spring. Another and larger spring is near the house. We found the kitchen refuse of a former population, covering a very large space.	In  traveling from here along the shore toward  the north-western  end, we passed  many shell-mounds of greater or less extent, of which the surface findings are pretty well picked up by collectors and amateur <i>curio<i>-hunters, leaving only the heavy rude stone implements we occasionally met, as nobody cared particularly to be heavily loaded in traveling over these seemingly bottomless hills.	We found on one of these shell deposits(--)thanks to their weight and insignificant appearance(--)very interesting and rare specimens of mortars, which showed the different stages of the manufacture of this utensil. At the north-west end, which is the farthest point of the island from Cuyler Harbor, are undoubtedly found the largest shell-mounds on the island, but located on ever-shifting sand.	We se1ected a wrong season, as the sand, driven by fierce north-west winds, had covered most of these deposits, and had made the two coves, which make in on both sides of the point, inaccessible for a boat-landing. Our findings, which we gathered in a week, were best procured, as we had learned during our previous explorations, in the graves.	They corresponded in the main with the style of burial on the main-land, where the grave負rench is partitioned into smaller rooms, although the materials used for this purpose are not slabs of sandstone as found in San Luis Obispo County, but mainly whalebones and split red wood ; the skeletons lying closely packed from two to six feet underground, in an irregular state, with knees drawn up and arms stretched out on the sides of the body or resting over the chest. The implements we found buried in the common way about the skull. 

Sick and scaled by the exposure to the grinding sand, and under constant fear of losing our tents in the brisk blows that lasted day and night during our stay, we were glad to be able to charter a schooner which we found in port, owned by the Stock-raising Company (who were engaged shearing their starving sheep), to take us to Santa Cruz Island.

Santa Cruz is probably the prettiest island of the group; in picturesqueness it equals and in vegetation excels Santa Catalina.	It is mountainous, with large stretches of <i>mesa</i>-land, especially at the eastern and western ends, where fine valleys and picturesque bluffs and ravines occur.	Timber is found in many places on the island, and quite extensive groves of conifers north of Prisoner's Harbor, while stunted oak-trees grow on the high rocky hills and sides of the steep gulches, and low willows in the ca(n)ons.	It is the largest island of the group, and has a fair shelter in Prisoner's Harbor, and in several places upon the west side, such as Smuggler's Cove, Coche Prietos, and Forney's Cove.  There is good water in different springs and creeks found all over the island the year round. It is owned by the Santa Cruz Island Wool-growing Company, which seems to be a profitable concern. Near a good wharf at Prisoner's Harbor stands a substantial adobe building, and back of it extends a beautiful valley which afforded us good camping-ground.

Our party spent about a month on this island, during which time we were active in making explorations all along its shores of fifty-eight miles in extent. Here we met the courteous officers of the steamer <i>Hassler</i> engaged in making soundings round the island. The captain and all the officers offered their assistance in the most friendly manner to convey our party to such places as lay in their route of sailing and would not interfere with their own duty. The Superintendent of the United States Coast Survey, Captain C. P. Patterson, in view of the fact that the exploration was made at the expense of the Government, and for the national display at the coming Centennial Exposition, having requested Captain Taylor, the commander of the <i>Hassler</i>, to extend such help as he might deem proper, it gave us a great advantage in prosecuting our work, and saved much expense.

Our main attention was again directed to finding and examining graves. The mode of burial is similar to that on San Miguel Island, in the shell-mounds, and not separated from the kitchen refuse as described by a writer in the OVERLAND of October, 1874, the adjacent ground being too rocky for the tools of the former population.	Although each burying-ground we dug up yielded but poorly in comparison with such places on the neighboring main-land, our findings on this island were numerous, and many forms are new to science.	We made here a collection of about thirty cases. The main articles we gathered were: Pots of magnesia-mica, worked in a wonderful manner out of solid pieces of this material, some specimens being thirty inches in diameter; mortars and pestles of sandstone; plates (<i>tortillas</i>) of magnesia-mica; bowls, cups, and spade趴eights of serpentine; perforated sinkers; fish-hooks of shell and bone, very ingeniously made, especially those of bone; borers of all descriptions; a full set of tools for the manufacture of fish虐ooks, together with the hooks in different stages of finish; a wooden sword, richly inlaid with shells; bone whistles and bone flutes; paints; shell-money, and money of pebble-stones; all kinds of shell-beads and ornamental carvings; brushes of soap-wood, used as combs; wooden utensils; a stone canoe, well modeled and finished; several canoes of wood; spoons; stone knives; flint lances, spear-heads, and arrow-points ; specimens of iron knives and lances; part of a cradle, showing yet plainly the mode of making it; a large painted wooden carving; pipes; drinking-cups of stone; lamps; sling-balls; all kinds of bone carvings; remains of baskets, mats, and net-work; and many stone implements, the use of which is not yet ascertained. 

The burying- grounds at Smuggler's Cove, Coche Prietos, Almos, Poso, Forney's Cove, and Secret Harbor gave the best results. There is a report that a cave exists on the island, showing remains of former habitation. We have been unable to ascertain anything proving the fact, and were assured by Stehman Forney, of the United States Coast Survey, then doing the last of the topography of Santa Cruz Island, that no such cave exists. This gentleman, and Captain Greenwell, of the United States Coast Survey, kindly rendered us their good services, and furnished information concerning the islands and main-land between Point Sal and San Buenaventura Valley.

While at this island we enjoyed the visits of Doctor Rothrock, Dr. Loew, and the zo(o)logist Henshaw, all members of the scientific corps of Lieutenant Wheeler's Exploring Expedition. Being on their way to Los Angeles, the rendezvous for the members of that expedition, they made a close connection with the island by the <i>Hassler</i>, and, having a few days' spare time, joined us in our rough camp at Forney's Cove, to observe our excavations, and also do some work themselves in their respective branches.

At Santa Cruz we chartered the schooner <i>Star of Freedom</i> to convey us to San Nicolas. We reached that island on a dark night, with the wind blowing lively, which compelled the captain to select the south end of the island as an anchorage. We fancied a campaign worse, if possible, than that at San Miguel, as the island appeared to be a faint lump in a thick fog-like cloud of sand which was whirled densely over our neat craft, although we were a half-mile off shore. The captain, with a shrill-sounding voice, recited his usual spicy prayers with much vehemence; on the sand-spit, not far off, the breakers, which form a half-mile in length, rise to a great height, and cause a roaring like thunder; at intervals we heard the howling sea-lions in the kelpy water, if not at their rookery on the near shore; which, with the darkness, the annoying sand, and the furious wind rattling the anchor-chain in madness, gave the impression that we had left rather than landed. With good prospects to lose our anchor and find ourselves the next morning probably at Santa Catalina, we awaited the coming dawn, trusting ourselves to the captain's care. The next morning was beautifully clear and almost calm; the sea was still rough, and as the swells, caused by a strong current that passes the south end, swept the shore in an angle, care had to be taken to prevent the boat going broadside on, which is equivalent to capsizing.

The island is a lump of soft coarse yellowish-gray sandstone, about 500 feet in height. The broad backbone, which seems almost level on its top, falls off on both sides in steep gulches and ravines, where the eye is met by innumerable cave-like carvings done by the grinding sand.	The eastern  end is sandy; dunes stretching there across the island, beginning with the depression at the end of which the house is located. The vegetation of the island is like that of San Miguel, ruined by overstocking it with sheep, which are here found in like starving condition. On the eastern end, near the house, we found some malva-bushes cleaned of their foliage to the reach of a sheep, which gave them the appearance of scrub oak-trees when seen from a distance. There are a few trees near the house, where a strong never-ceasing spring supplies the necessary water, which has a somewhat sweetish taste.	The shifting sand has almost buried the adobe house, and its old inmate, the superintendent of the Stock-raising Company. Farther on to the north-eastward, at the so-called Chinese Harbor, is another spring with good water.	It is at the eastern end, on the dunes, where we found the shell-mounds abundantly, although some are found at intervals all along the shore from the house toward the sand-spit on the south end, beyond which but few small ones exist; also a few on the western shores. The mode of burial on this island is different from that previously investigated. The bodies rest in distinct graves by themselves, lying on their backs, feet drawn up, and arms folded over the chest; the head either resting on the occiput, the side, or sunk to the breast. The skeletons, as a rule, were facing the east, although other directions were observed.	Some show signs of having been buried in matting coated with asphaltum. Most of the skeletons and implements are laid bare by the winds. Our <i>modus operandi</i> was here changed; spade and pick were dispensed with, and in the first days our party went over the shell-mounds and piled the findings in heaps, which afterward were conveyed to the boat by horses procured of the "governor" of the island (as the old man styles himself), and thence taken by water to our camping-ground for a careful packing in boxes brought with us from San Francisco. We obtained 127 mortars(--)a heavy collection  by itself(--)about 200 pestles, cups, trinkets, a small lot of quite unique sculptures, and some articles new to science.

The money deposits on this island are remarkable. In some places on the shell-mounds we noticed, apart from the skeletons, and not buried with them, numerous small heaps of shells of the <i>Olivella bipicata</i>, and some of the land貞hell <i>Helix strigosa</i>; also, a uniform size of pebbles, seemingly blackened by fire, averaging in quantity from a half to one cubic foot, which were evidently stored there, and afterward exposed to the drifts of sand, forming conspicuous diminutive hillocks. We found as many as sixty of these deposits on one shell衫ound. This, with the position of some of the implements we observed, seems to point to the fact that the last inhabitants were taken off suddenly. We found,  for  instance,  instead  of  being buried with the dead, any mortars set in the ground to the rim, the pestle either resting in its opening or lying alongside, as if it had done its duty only some days before.

The last island visited was Santa Catalina. It appears to be a long mountain removed from its base and planted in the wide ocean, whose waters are here wonderfully clear on account of the micaceous bottom. This mountain, seventeen miles in length, descends in innumerable steep gulches and ravines, and often abruptly ends in perpendicular bluffs, some of which are over a thousand feet high. About five miles from its western end the island is almost cut in two by a remarkable isthmus, forming on the northern side Isthmus Cove, and on the other, the southern side, the fine but small port of Catalina Harbor. The eastern and western parts of the island are connected only by narrow strips of made land, not forty feet above water, and about 600 yards from ocean to ocean. The island is well known, and belongs to James Lick, and is settled by squatters, mostly engaged in stock-raising, fishing, etc. Some mining has been done on the island, but to no advantage. It is well timbered, with plenty of water in wells and springs. The Government barracks are still in good condition, and offer shelter to picnic parties from the neighboring main-land, also to sheep-shearers in the time of wool-clip. In front of the porch we made our collection of rattle snakes, that creep out from under the brick base of the building to indulge a healthy digestion in the warm sunlight. 

The arch(ae)ology of this island is said to have been ransacked by a scientific gentleman of merit, who lingered formerly around the picturesque isthmus. He told me himself, some time ago, that he had even spotted the "fat boy"(--)meaning the image of the temple to the sun, as reported by Padre de la Ascension, of Cabrillo fame, whose narratives he studied in the original. To my deep regret I found that there was but little left for our party to gather, and nothing new to science. Even the thick singularly-shaped cranium, much of a <i>dolichocephalic</i> pattern, has already been described by Bret Harte as the prehistoric skull of the Stanislaus.
