By CLARENCE E. EDWORDS.

ALEXANDER SELKIRK had his Daniel Defoe to immortalize him and the island of Juan Fernandez, and in every man's memory lingers the delights of hours spent with Robinson Crusoe wandering over his little empire with his man Friday and his parrot and goats, but the chronicler of the weary months and years of waiting spent by a lone Indian woman on San Clemente island, off the southern coast of California, is yet to come.

It has been many years since she was found and taken to a hospitable home in Santa Barbara, and still no one has taken her wonderful experience as the theme for a novel, nor has San Clemente island achieved notice because of her habitation thereon for eighteen years in solitude. Along the southern coast of the State this island is better known as the Island of Skulls than by its geographical name, and while the peculiar features of the semi-desert bit of land have appealed to popular fancy little attention has been given to either the marooned woman or the reason why she was there. In fact, her very presence and rescue are almost looked upon as myths by the later residents who have gradually taken the places of the first population of Ventura and Santa Barbara counties.

San C[l]emente's shores are bleak and drear, guarded by inhospitable coasts, where rock and wave of restless ocean serve to keep off all except those who are driven by necessity or curiousity to visit the land. High cliffs, running up thousands of feet above the water, seem to guard the secrets of the island, and there is nothing inviting in the appearance or the prospects of the land. For this reason all early navigators passed the island by, and thus it came about that the lone Indian woman finally ceased to hope for rescue, and, with the stolidity of her race, abandoned herself to her fate, thinking, if she ever thought at all, that she would end her days near where her baby had perished at the time she was left to live or die as fate willed.

For eighteen long years she had lived alone, eking out an existence from the shellfish which are so abundant on these California islands, and so far had her mind wandered from the normal that when Captain Nidever happened to notice from the deck of his vessel that a human being was on the island, she fled to the interior like some wild thing, afraid of her own kind. Nor was her rescue accomplished without a long search, and then almost a battle before she could be induced to accompany her captors.

Record of Adventure.

There is still record of the captain's adventure, told in his own language, and from it we may learn of the conditions on the island, more than thirty years ago, when he found the solitary woman. His is a plain, blunt tale, divested of all attempt at sensationalism, simply reciting the incident as if [it] were but one of many strange happenings which came to him in his roving life on the high seas.

"Light winds and calms had marked the voyage up the coast," writes Captain Nidever, "and as we came to the outer island we were carried close in shore by a current. It was a clear day with but little wind and we could see everything on the island plainly. As I looked up to the top of the high cliff which bordered the ocean I thought I saw a man, and on getting my glass I plainly made him out. He was without any clothing, and seemed to try to avoid being seen. I was sure it was some person who had been marooned and I made landing after anchoring just off shore in a little bay. I took three sailors with me and searched the island for a long time without finding any one, but I saw that some one [sic] was there, for I came upon piles of shells from clams and other shellfish. When we got over toward t[h]e interior of the island we came upon a great pile of bones, among which were human skulls and leg and arm bones. It looked as if there had been a battle and a great number of people killed. We found a trail leading into the hills near a spring, and on following it we came upon a cave. Here we found a woman so wild that she fought and scratched us when we took hold of her. She had no weapons, but used her hands and rocks. We finally overpowered her and took her to the vessel, where we gave her clothing to cover herself, as she was naked. I tried to talk to her, but she could not understand Spanish, English or any of the Indian languages which I knew. She seemed frightened at first and we could not get anything out of her, but before we reached shore she tried to make signs which we could not understand. [I] took her to my house, where she stayed until she died, about a year later."

The captain did not tell the entire story, for he was not a novelist and could not see the wonderful part of the incident. To him it was but a human being rescued and cared for, and [hi]s great heart did not stop with taking the woman from her prison, but her welfare was looked after by him until she died.

Remains a Mystery.

Who this woman was, what her tribe, and why she was left on the island for all those years, are mysteries which will never be solved, for all who by any possibility might know something about it died long before she was taken to the mainland. Two stories have remained from the day when she was taken to the home of Captain Nidever, both, however, being surmises for she could never explain the cause of her exile. The most prevalent story, and at the same time the most improbable, is that when the Spanish owners of the land visited the island of San Clemente they found a tribe of Indians on the verge of starvation, and decided to take them to the mainland, where they could be cared for. All the Indians were taken to a vessel, and as they were preparing to set sail this woman remembered that she had left her baby behind. She rushed back after the little one and before she returned a storm arose which drove the ship to sea, and it was impossible to again make a landing. The vessel sailed for the mainland, the authorities intending to return for the woman when the weather became settled, but as time passed she was forgotten and left to her fate. According to the story the baby died from exposure and hunger, but the woman lived on shell fish. The improbability of this story lies in the fact that the Spanish who thought enough of humanity to take a whole tribe of Indians away from starvation would scarcely leave a woman to starve alone with her baby.

That no tribe of Indians was taken from the island is further established by the fact that when the woman was taken to Santa Barbara the Indians of the country for miles up and down the coast and in the interior were brought to see if they could talk with her. She could understand none of the languages, nor could any of the old Indians remember anything about the incident, nor could they understand even one word used by the woman. Through the sign language she made known a few of her wants, and by signs she told of the eighteen years that had passed since she was left alone. It is extremely probable, however, that many more than eighteen years had passed, for the passage of time would be uncounted after a few years. This story is generally accepted because it is considered the most plausible by the unthinking, but to my mind the other story, even thought it be almost a legend, more readily accounts for the woman's presence on the island, as it also accounts for the numerous skeletons which are found scattered over the place.

The Pirate Theory.

According to this second story San Clemente island was at one time densely populated by a strong and war-like tribe of Indians which waged war on the tribes of the mainland to such an extent that all communication between them was severed. The island Indians were savage, and refused all connection with other tribes, and made a practice of eating those of their enemies who fell into their hands. It is supposed that the Seri Indians who now inhabit the Tiburón island in the gulf of California are a part of the same race, and are probably the descendants of those who were formerly the inhabitants of the Island of Skulls.

In the early days, so the story runs, Russian pirates sailed down the shores of California and devastated all the towns along the coast. These pirates happened to be driven to the island where this tribe made its home, and a battle ensued, which ended only with the extinction of the savages with the exception of one woman, who hid in a cave until the invaders had departed. This story accounts for the pile of bones which is still to be seen on the island, but it, too, has the elements of the mythical, for it has been many years since Russian pirates sailed the waters of the California coast, and as there are no records of such devastation by these corsairs it must be taken as the invention of some one [sic] who desired to account for the unaccountable. It is a fact that the woman herself could not tell anything about either the reason for her isolation nor for the presence of the numerous skulls of human beings which lie scattered over a great space on one part of the island.

When found the woman was strong and healthy, but good care and the confinement of civilized life did not agree with her, and she had been in the care of Captain Nidever but a few months until she sickened. It seemed as if the long life in the open air had brought about a bodily condition which resented the indoor life of civilization, and a cold soon changed into consumption, which carried her off despite all the care that could be given her. When she died she was just beginning to talk a little English, but not enough to give any account of her adventures or of the cause of the pile of skulls and bones which lies scattered over the island. This being the case, we can but speculate on these causes, and one man's theory is as good as another's.

Lived on Shell Fish.

According to the statements of those who found the woman, she had lost the art of making a fire, and lived entirely on raw shell fish and such berries and roots as she found on the island. There had evidently been huts on the island when the tribe was living there, but these had all been destroyed by the elements, and the woman made her habitation in a cave, or rather depression in the side of the cliff, which formed a shelter from the wind and rain. Her domestic habit remained with her, as is evidenced by an immense pile of abalone shells near where she made her home. A mass of seaweed and brush formed her bed, and, as she had no method of replenishing her clothing, she finally became naked, and it is probable that she went this way for many years.

How she occupied her time, and why she did not cast herself into the sea rather than undergo the loneliness and desolation of her surroundings can be understood only by understanding the Indian mind. Her reversion to complete savagery, leaving nothing but the animal in her to fight for life against all the adverse circumstances surrounding her, was a natural sequence of the accident which marooned her, and even to the day of her death she showed a fear of other Indians, with the exception of one woman to whom she became deeply attached.

The approach to San Clemente island seems barred by the high cliffs which face the sea, but as one gets closer he finds numerous little bays and inlets, and except in stormy weather the landing is easy. The hills, which rise almost from the water's edge, present a most picturesque appearance, with deep indentations traversing them in every direction. Color and form blend admirably to make a beautiful picture, and give an inviting prospect which belies the dreary aspect presented after one lands on the island and goes into the interior. All the hills seem to be covered with the softest verdure; but as one gets closer it is noticed that the coloring comes from the earth and not from growth. These cliffs rise fully a thousand feet from the sea, and are the nesting place of myriads of sea birds of many kinds. Here the murre, the tern, the gull and various other feathered inhabitants make their home, undisturbed by man or other enemy, and undoubtedly the female Crusoe, who remained so long as their neighbor, must have utilized their eggs as a part of her food supply. 

Not the least strange feature of the island is a peculiar formation of rock which takes on queer and weird forms, resembling to a marked degree petrifactions of trees. Those who have been in Monument Park, in Colorado, will understand the idea, for it is very similar. Like so many small tree trunks, bereft of branches, these rocks rise in every direction, ranging in size from small saplings to trees a foot in diameter. Investigation shows, however, that they are not petrifactions, but are sandstone formations which have been cut by nature's sand blast into the shapes they now present. Standing erect, as they do, in the midst of a waste of sand, they present a most drear and desolate appearance. It looks as if some mighty cataclysm had swept over the place, arresting all growth, and preserving conditions of a dead and gone age.

Were one to permit his imagination to run riot, as the conditions would warrant, he might well believe that the ghosts of those who had fought the battle which left the plain strewn with skeletons, were still standing guard over the land for which they struggled. Go there on some moonlight night and the feeling changes into the uncanny, and chills chase each other up and down the spines of even the bravest men. Some of these formations take on the appearance of animals, and some of human beings, while it is easy to see gnomes working their unholy spite against mortals who dare to invade their realm.

It can readily be seen why the Indians of the mainland shun this island, and why it is impossible to get any of them to go ashore. They have the hereditary fear of the cannibals who once inhabited the place handed down through generations and changed with the changing times until now they no longer understand either cannibal or enemy in their terror, but fear the spirits of evil whom they believe haunt the place where so many bones attest the death of an unknown people. So deep rooted is the fear of the island that few of the mainland Indians will even talk about it or the sights that are to be seen there. They have heard of the dead bodies and of the strange formations and are content to let it rest with the hearing. They have not been to the island nor will they ever go unless they are driven there through stress of weather when they happen to be fishing off shore and are caught in a storm.

Skeletons of Humans.

Lying some eighty miles southwest of the city of San Buena Ventura and away from the other islands of the Santa Barbara chain which forms the outer circle of the channel made famous because of its use by the national war ships in their trials of speed, San Clemente island is little visited and little known. There is nothing on the island to invite those commercially incl[i]ned, and its archaeological opportunities have attracted but few scientists on account of the difficulty experienced in reaching the island and the obstacles in the way of enjoying a sojourn there. For this reason, perhaps, the island is little known. What is known is of a nature to invite only the most ardent student, for outside of the queer formations mentioned but two facts are of importance.

Along the mainland, from Lower California clear up to the Columbia river are to be found mounds containing what is known as kitchen-middens where vanished Indian tribes once had their homes. On San Clemente island is a kitchen-midden of most peculiar nature, in that it is composed almost entirely of red abalone shells. These shells lie scattered all over a tract of the island where the tribe evidently had its permanent domicile, and as the wind blows and the sands shift these shells, change their position, become uncovered, and are again buried in the sand. Along the shore of the island these abalones are found in great quanitities, and from the size of the pile of shells on the mound they evidently formed an important part of the provisions of the Indians.

But it is to the skeletons of human beings that the island owes its greatest prominence. On the side of a sand-covered slope, extending from the sea to the interior hills of the island are found hundreds of bones of men and women, and even of little children. Skulls by the dozen are there, and while nearly all of them have the characteristics of the savage races, some have the appearance of the Caucasian, and this leads to the belief that the bones are those of the men who fell in battle between the Indians and Russian pirates. The dry atmosphere of the island has preserved the bones to such an extent that it is impossible to tell the age, or rather, the time that has elapsed since the people were killed. One of the strange features of these bones is the fact that none of them show indications of having been broken by weapons. The skulls are intact and in several instances the bones lie just as they would normally, there being no animals on the island to disturb them.

It is easy to see from an examination of these bones that two races are represented, for some of them are very large, while the most of them are of people under the average size. The bones of the women and children are all of the Indian type, but among the men many are large framed and the larger skulls show a higher type of intellect. This admixture of the skeletons of two distinct people is of itself a refutation of the belief that these skeletons are of a tribe that was swept away by an epidemic of by starvation.

While many utensils used in grinding corn and in cooking are found scattered among the bones, and also among the shells of the kitchen-midden, neither spear nor arrow head is to be found. Possibly such as may have been there among the bones on the field of battle were carried away by the earlier discoverers of the place, who took the relics most easily cared for. It would seem probable that with all these skeletons there would be a few evidences of a fierce fight, but, as before mentioned, no bones show marks of wounds and no remains of weapons of any character are to be found.

Several well-preserved Indian mortars used in grinding corn are scattered over the ground among the bones, and also among the abalone shells, and in several places are broken bits of pottery of the crudest kind. This pottery, as well as the mortars, has evidently been brought to the island, for there are no evidences of kilns for burning the pottery, and the mortars are made of a stone foreign to the island.

Another legend which accounts for the presence of these bones is that the island was sacred to a certain tribe which used it only on ceremonial occasions when they took their prisoners there and held feasts on human flesh. According to this story no people inhabited the island, but on periodical occasions this cannibalistic tribe went there, and after feasting, left the bones, which gradually accumulated. According to this theory the woman who was rescued was one of the prisoners who escaped by some means and remained hidden away for many years, even after the coming of the whites caused a cessation of the savage rites. Many things connected with the bones as well as with the island, bear out this theory, and also account for the fact that no weapons have been found, and that the bones show no evidences of injury by w[o]unds.